
################# Definition ########
/Note/
Number,Japanese title,English title,		1=randomly generated

%DEFINE
0,日記,My Diary,				1
1,迷子の兵士に送るマニュアル,Beginner's Guide,	0
2,バグです,It's a bug,				0
3,見るな,Don't read this,			1
4,博物館運営マニュアル,Museum Guide,		1
5,クラムベリー中毒,Crimberry Addict,		1
6,目が回る,Cat's Cradle,			1
7,ハーブの効用,Herb Effect,			1
8,店の運用マニュアル,Shopkeeper Guide,		1
9,初めての自家栽培,Easy Gardening,		1
10,水を大切に！,Water!,				1
11,牧畜のすすめ,Breeder's Guide,		1
12,なぞの手記,Strange Diary,			1
13,ピラミッドへの挑戦状,Pyramid Invitation,	0
14,カードゲームのルール,Card Game Manual,	1
15,ダンジョン運営マニュアル,Dungeon Guide,	1
16,隠されしムジャフの定理,Wily Mujaf's Thesis,		0
17,ネフィア症候群,A Review on Nefian Psychosis,		1
18,贈り物のマナー,Gifting Gifts,		1
19,集団活動訓練,An Exercise in Team-Building,	1
20,冒険暮らし　＜518／春号＞,Adventurers Quarterly Spring '18,	1
21,恨みのノート,Bitter Last Words,		0
22,作戦指示書,Mission Briefing,			1
23,まだその段階か？,Get on my level,		1
24,ネクロマニュアル,Necromanual,		1
25,ジャーナルのひみつ,Secrets of the journal,	0
26,魔術講義配布資料,SOR110 Introduction to Sorcery,		1
27,採掘はいいぞ,You dig mining?,		1
28,ワッツエンターテインメント？,What's in a performance?,		1
29,次元間力観測実験報告書,Dimensional Energy Report,	0
30,依頼についてのアドバイス,Quest Advice,		0
31,釣り入門,Fishing Introduction,		0
32,収容者矯正の手引,Inmate Correction Manual,		1
%END

/Translation Note
Text written after %**,EN will be displayed in the English version of Elona.

#####################################
%0,JP



今日から毎日 日記をつけることにしよう。
%END

%0,EN



I'll start writing in my diary from
today on!
%END



#####################################
%1,JP
迷子の兵士に送るマニュアル
	written by エウダーナの将軍

（注）エウダーナ兵以外の閲覧を禁ずる！

　迷子の諸君、何をしたらいいかわからな
い諸君、心配することは何もない。隊から
はぐれてしまった時にとるべき行動を簡単
に説明しよう。

■何をしたらいいか

　まずは戦場から避難し、南東の炭鉱街ヴ
ェルニースを目指すとよい。街には食料物
資があるし、小銭がたまれば買い物もでき
る。

　適当に準備ができたら、街のすぐ東にあ
る洞窟に行くとよい。初心者が経験をつむ
には最適で、金もそこそこたまる。

■してはならないこと

　無闇にいろいろな場所にいかないこと。
見知らぬダンジョンに入った直後、恐ろし
く強力な生き物に殺される話はよく聞く。

　食料の残りにいつも気をつけること。
食料は高いが、生き残るためには必要だ。
食料を補充する方法は他にもいろいろある
が、腹の減り具合にはいつも気をつけるべ
し。

■最終的な目的は？

　十分に経験をつんだなら、ネフィアの遺
跡群の一つであり、我がエウダーナの繁栄
の鍵が隠されているといわれる「レシマス」
を目指すのだ。

　最下層に辿り着き、戻ってきたものはま
だいないが、この迷宮のなぞを解いた者に
は、莫大な賞金を与える。

では諸君の健闘を祈る！
%END

%1,EN
Beginner's Guide
	Author: An Old Adventurer

<This book is weathered and yellow
with age>

I leave this book here in the off
chance that should I not survive my
final adventure, others may learn
from my trials and tribulations.

I have lived many years and have
done many deeds. I have seen much
what this world has to offer.

This cave has been my hideaway in the
last few seasons, though if you are
reading this, it is most likely now
yours to reside in. I don't mind as
I'm either dead or fabulously rich.

Still, if you are planning on going
into the same trade as I and are not
the local scamps just playing at it,
some advice should be parted to you.

Now where to begin?

I won't know from which way you came
from so it's best to give you the
local landmarks;

If you follow the trail from here to
the South-East you find Vernis. It's
a mining town, but it should still
have some shops, a tavern and an inn.
You should be able to find some work
there, as well as food, gear, and
even a friend or two. The innslady I
recall was having some trouble with
local ruffians the last time I was
there.

East of Vernis is what the locals
call the "Puppy Cave". It's well...
always changing. A local mage called
it a "Hausdorff-Besicovitch fractal
plane", whatever that means.
If you leave the cave and come back,
or go up or down floors, it will
change all the creatures, items,
walls, and exits. You can find quite
a bit of stuff if you don't mind
hopping in and out.

The "Puppy" of this cave is fairly
deep in, and a child in town would
love to get it back, but it kept
getting itself killed when I tried.
It always reappeared on that floor
when I left and came back, but I
gave up after a few tries. Maybe
you can do it. Just don't get lost.

Once you are a bit tougher and better
geared, the Gray cave of Lesimas
might be be another good spot. It's
one of the more ancient ruins of
Nefia, and there's bound to be
something interesting in there. If
you ignore the roads, it's almost due
south of this cave.

No doubt all around the land there
will be caves and forests spawning
with loathsome critters. Just don't
go blindly into them, check them out
BEFORE going in. Preparation is a key
difference from a live Adventurer and
a dead one.
         -== Geography ==-
If you follow the roads from Vernis:
-Port Kapul is to the west. 3-5 days
  Good Business there as it's a port
  Fighters Guild and an Arena

-Palmia is to the East. 2-3 days
  Big City, lots to see and do
  King lives here
  Has Arena

-Yowyn is to the South-East. 2-3 days
  Farm Town, not a lot to do unless
  you like turnips and Harvesting.
  Note to self: Clean out Yeek's Nest
  AGAIN... worse than rabbits they be

-Lumiest is South-East of Palmia
  On an Island
  Lots of mages live there

-Derphy is South-west of Vernis
  No roads lead there
  Wretched hive of scum and villainy
  Steer clear of Dragon's Nest!

-Noyel is Far FAR to the east
  Bring a sandwich, it's a long walk
  Snow is slow going
  Don't poke the Fire Giant. Bad juju

      -== Work and Jobs ==-
While you may want to go about
slaying dragons and saving damsels,
it's best to start small. Being an
adventurer means you'll do jobs that
no one else wants to do.

Deliveries are a good way to start
out in this business. Example:
     Accept job
  -->GET THE ITEM AT YOUR FEET!<--
     Deliver item to recipient
     Collect reward
Note that forgetting the item to
deliver is very BAD, but not the end
of the world. If you are very lucky,
the local shops or fields may have
what you are looking for. They won't
know the difference, trust me.
Also note how many days you have to
deliver things. Running from Lumiest
to Port Kapul is NOT fun, and you may
simply not be fast enough yet to do
the really high paying ones.

Hunting can range from easy to very
VERY hard. The money offered is a
good way to tell how bad it will be.
Be careful doing these, as it takes
just one nasty critter to get you.

Gift getting also ranges from easy
to absurd. Just remember that if you
accept the job, running from town to
home and back takes time, and you may
not have that long to do it.

Cooking requests are only good if you
can cook, have the items, and can
deliver before the food rots. But if
you check out the local bakery before
accepting, you may just be able to
buy what you need before doing the
job.

Harvesting LOOKS easy, but it can be
very hard. Waste no time, and go as
unburdened as possible. Speed is the
key for these jobs.
Finally, try not to fail a job, it's
a black stain on your record, and too
many of those can get the guards on
you. Use you noggin BEFORE accepting
any job. Can I do it? Will I have the
time? Who gets their kid garbage on
their birthday?

      -== Advice and Tips ==-
And now a few nuggets of wisdom:

-Cargos of food are cheap, and you'll
eat them as you travel overland. But
you cannot eat them inside towns or
dungeons. If you are hungry just exit
the town or dungeon, eat, and enter.

-Be cheap. 'b'ash fruit bearing trees
in towns and fields for fruit, and
scavenge whatever plantlife you can
outside. That armor is not going to
come to you if you keep eating cakes
and pies.

-The meat of many monsters is edible.
Women love Putit flesh for what it
does for their skin. Some isn't so
good for you, but if you're hungry...

-While succulent and tasting of young
pork, the flesh of man should not be
eaten. Only crazy people eat people,
and you aren't crazy are you?

-Innkeepers for coin can feed you
quite nicely. They have beds too.

-Until you can buy/find/steal a bed
for your home, stay at inns when you
are tired. A sleeping bag is a good
idea for deep dungeon trekking.

-Should a pet or ally fall in battle,
most towns have a bartender who can
bring them back for a price.

-Check your 'j'ournal! It has all the
information about quests you are on,
jobs you are doing, events, your own
reputation and bills. Check it often.

-On the subject of bills. When you
become famous enough, you'll get a
salary of money and items twice a
month. The salary will be dropped off
in the chest in your home. However,
with salary also comes taxes. Take
the bill in hand and cash in pocket
to the local embassy just north of
Palmia and pay it there. Don't let
your bills add up as the taxmen are
worse than any dragon or demon.

-Should your skills start to plateau,
seek a trainer. There is one in every
town, and will sharpen your existing
skills. They also have skills you do
not yet possess and for a price will
teach you them. Beware though, they
only accept platinum coins, and those
are in short supply these days.

-And finally, beware the weather. Oh,
a little rain may have never killed
anybody, but with heavy rain comes
lightning that can blind you and the
great thunder which can confuse you.
Try not to get lost while in one.
Sometimes, the best thing to do is
stay in place till your head clears.
Rarely, but with increasing fervor is
the dreaded Etherwind. Beware this.
A friend of mine was stuck outside in
it and could barely be called human
when he finally staggered inside.
When it comes, FIND SHELTER! I cannot
stress this enough. Hide in a cave if
the monsters inside won't tear you to
bits. If you are in a town you are by
no means safe. Run to the innkeeper
and demand Shelter. Wait out the evil
storms, and only after it passes can
you return to your duties.







In closing, I hope this is of some
use to you, and I hope my final
adventure is a good one. Now if you
will excuse me, I have a fort to
conquer. How bad could it be?

Good luck to you and your travels.
%END



#####################################
%2,JP


　この本はアイテム生成に失敗した時に出
現します。何か特別な行動を行ったり、バ
グの原因に心当たりがあれば報告して頂け
ると助かります。ゲームプレイに支障はな
いので、原因が不明であれば放置してくだ
さい。
%END

%2,EN

	Author: <Madness!>

This book is generated when item
generation fails. If you find this
book and have an idea as to what
could be causing the bug that made
it appear, please report it.

If you have no idea what could have
caused it, then don't worry about it.
This shouldn't affect gameplay in
any way.
--The Management
%END



#####################################
%3,JP


見たな？
%END

%3,EN


I warned you.
%END



#####################################
%4,JP
博物館運営マニュアル
	written by はく製マニア

　博物館を運営したいなんて物好きの君に
幾つかアドバイスしよう。

　博物館は、稀に手に入るはく製やカード
を展示し、来客から収入を得る施設だ。博
物館のどこにでもいいから、これらのアイ
テムを置いてみれば、博物館のランクがあ
がるのを確認できるだろう。

　はく製やカードの希少価値はそれぞれ異
なる。巨大なはく製や、入手しづらかった
りユニークだったりするアイテムほど、希
少価値は高いぞ。

　特に、ユニークなはく製を多く展示して
くれたなら、こちらからも感謝の印を進呈
しよう。月初めを楽しみに待っていてくれ。

　注意しておきたいのは、重なっているア
イテムは、展示していることにならないと
いうことだ。また、全く同じ種類のアイテ
ムは、二個目以降は希少価値が低くなるぞ。

では、頑張ってくれ。いつか君の博物館の
噂を耳にすることを楽しみにしているよ。

ps. おっと、忘れるところだった。建設当
初の博物館は狭いから、スペースがなくな
って来たら、掘り進めて拡張するといい。
ハウスボードやレジスターを持ち込んで使
ってもいいぞ。
%END

%4,EN
Museum Administration Manual Mk.III
Written by Curator Schmidt

So you want to run a Museum do you?

Young Sir/Lady, it takes some hefty
capital to purchase such a deed, but
if you have the time, patience, and
money this old curator will help you
out with this handy, unbiased manual.

In your wanton and overly hedonistic
destruction of the local flora and
fauna (henceforth known in this guide
as "adventuring") you might have come
across some of the following:

Item a.) Figure of <Fauna>
Item b.) Card   of <Fauna>

If so, then you may have barely given
them a glance before shoving them in
your sack if ill-gotten gains and
simply gone back to "adventuring".
No doubt you have sold them for more
tankards of ale and legs of mutton,
but the more intelligent among you
might collect them into a pile and
ponder "Why do monsters have these?"

The answer: Vanity! And Magic!

And it is these things that we shall
profit from. And it's so simple even
an adventurer can do it!

Still, just in case, I have written
down the exact steps to minimize any
unfortunate mishaps that might arise.

Step 1.) Purchase a deed of a Museum.
   This step is what chokes out the
   small fry from the serious doers.

Step 2.) 'r'ecite the deed upon the
   spot on the world you wish your
   museum to be. Let the gnomes do
   the building, it won't take long.

Step 3.) Aesthetically place all the
   Cards and Figures you have found
   inside the museum. Neatness is a
   virtue, though not necessary.

Step 4.) Profit!

That should do it as far as the basic
setup requires. If you want even more
information about specific queries,
merely read on to learn more!
      -== Notes and Caveats ==-

Whilst having more than one museum is
certainly possible, only your first
one will make any money.

Figures are worth more than cards
most times anyway.

Don't pile multiple items upon one
space. It is entirely unprofessional,
and utterly ineffectual.

The mightier the monster, the better
value the card and Figure. Rare are
the Figures with a Name or Title on
them. These so-called "Unique"
Figures indeed are best. And in
order to encourage more museums to
showcase these, I've set up a trust
that will reward museums based on the
number of Unique Figures that they
have on display, paid out on the
first of every month.

Back on the topic, while having a
dragon's card is nice, having ten
is just tacky. Variety is key.
The more duplicates you have,
the less they are worth.

Oh and one more thing... the gnomes
that build your museum have somewhat,
oh, narrow tastes. You may have to
bring in a <house board> or
<register> to sculpt it into your
own grandiose vision.



            -== Errata ==-

Base cost: 		140,000 gp
Maintenance cost:    1500 gp/month
Income per rank:      100 gp/month

**Figures above are approximates only


Happy Curating!
%END



#####################################
%5,JP
クラムベリー中毒


　クラムベリーとは、幻覚作用を起こすク
ラムの実です。乱用されているのは、主に、
クラムベリーを乾燥させたものです。クラ
ムベリーにはロイサビシンやロシロシンと
いう麻薬成分が含まれています。

　乱用を続けると、クラムベリーだけでは
では満足できず、スクーマや大麻など他の
薬物の乱用につながるおそれがあります。

　クラムべリーに含まれる麻薬成分のロイ
サビシンやロシロシンは中枢神経系に作用
し、中枢神経の興奮や麻痺、幻覚を起こし
ます。主な症状は幻覚、酩酊状態、狂乱、
発熱などで、食べてから１５〜６０分後に
現れます。
%END

%5,EN
Crimberry Addiction and You
A Schmidt Education Pamphlet

Every year more and more people are
becoming addicted to the seemingly
harmless Crimberry.

Known by an ancient Nefian dialect as
Kur-amu-beri, which should just go to
show its long and sordid history with
our land and peoples, the Crimberry
is a strong hallucinogen with many
different applications.

Simply eating a berry can cause the
following symptoms in 15 to 60mins:
- Hallucinations
- Impairment like Drunkenness
- Raving like a loon
- Fever-like motor-control failure.
Crimberries are highly addictive, and
should the addict fail to get his
next "Crim", he will either turn to
other narcotics, or become a threat
to our community.

And of course, no one thinks of the
poor children who get involved in our
seemingly "adult" activities. They've
even created a new way to "enjoy" the
devilish berries;

They copy the wild yeeks and dry them
then shove the dried berry up their
nose. This "snorting" of Crimberries
will lead to the proliferation of
excess aggression, and will lead more
desparate individuals to become known
as "adventurers" commiting insane
deeds to get their next fix.
While some of the older, long haired
Wizards demand that Crimberries remin
legalized, if only for their sacred
"rituals", this must stop!

        FOR OUR CHILDREN!

        FOR OUR FUTURE!

CONTACT YOUR LOCAL MAGISTRATE TODAY!
	Petition the King!
%END



#####################################
%6,JP




目がまわる、目がまわる、目がまわる
%END

%6,EN
Round Eyes! Round Eyes! Round Eyes!
%END



#####################################
%7,JP
ハーブの効用
	written by ハーブマニア

●キュラリア
効果はよくわからない。ただ、全ての能力
にとって良い影響があることは臨床実験で
わかっている。

●モージア
これは明白だ。筋力と耐久を上昇させ、ま
た潜在能力を高めてくれるのだ。

●マレイロン
モージアと同じような効果だが、どうやら
精神的な能力に影響するようだ。

●スペンスウィード
いまいちよく分からない。近年の学説では
どうやら感覚系統に良い働きがあると言わ
れている。

●アルローニア
ホルモンを活性化させる。すごくエッチな
気分になる。…ごほん。記憶力の向上にも
効果があるというが。

●ストマフィリア
このハーブの効果はお腹を張り裂けそうな
ぐらい満腹にするのだ。さらには、速度を
高めるという報告もある。
%END

%7,EN
Blessed Herbs
Chronicled by Dr. Schmidt, PhDM

* Curaria [KYURARIA AQUIFOLIUM]
Effect is well known and medicinal.
However, the ability of said effects
is based entirely on it's so called
"consecrated" state, which has been
clinically proven to be a real effect
and not merely a placebo.
Effect: All-around enhancement

* Morgia [MOJIA DIPSACUS PILOSUS]
Massive hormone Stimulant. Increases
muscle mass, strength and endurance.
Blind-Test subjects received various
"consecrated" state herbs and thusly
received differing returns. This only
goes to prove that Gods do in fact
exist, and that all our science is
meaningless in their might.
Effect: Strength and Endurance
	enhancement

* Mareilon [MAREIRON DIPSACUS FEROX]
Neuro-Chemical stimulant. Increases
cognitive abilities. Level of effect
entirely on "consecrated" state.
Effect: Mental enhancement

* Spenseweed [SUPENSUUIDO LONGIFOLIA]
All effects as of yet are unknown,
though it has been noted that those
who ingest it seem to be more "aware"
and levels of perception may be up.
More testing is needed to determine
all side effects.
Effect: Perception enhancement


* Alraunia [ARURONIA MARTYNIA LUTEA]
Hormone-activated. Aphrodisiac.
Thus extremely popular with the
locals. Oddly enough, it also appears
to have some ability at improving
memory. Research still pending grant.
Effect: Memory and Libido
	enhancement

* Stomafilla [SUTOMAFIRIA HYPOGAEA]
Upon contact with the stomach, the
herb expands and fills the cavity,
leading the consumer to feel very
"bloated". Long term use and the
nutritional level of the plant has
yet to be verified. There are also
reports of it enhancing the user's
speed, but most sporting competitions
have yet to ban its use.


Effect: Satiety inducer, Speed
	enhancement


As more specimens are brought in and
tested, so shall we update this brief
guide.

Until then,
Dr. Schmidt
	Philosophiae Doctor Magus
%END



#####################################
%8,JP
店の運用マニュアル
	written by 熟練店主

　店の運用は、そんなに難しいものじゃな
い。アイテムをたくさん陳列し、魅力的な
者を店主に雇い、あとは定期的に売り上げ
の報告を待つだけだ。ただ、下記の点は覚
えておこう。

* 来客の人数は店主の魅力と、店のランク
に比例するぞ。

* 同じアイテムでも店主の交渉スキルによ
って売却額は変わるぞ。店主の交渉スキル
と魅力の潜在能力は、ブロンズ硬貨で回復
できるぞ。

* 店のランクは、売った品物の数が一定の
数に達すると上昇するぞ。

* 客の財布の中身は店のランクが高くなる
ほど豊かになるぞ。

* ランクが低いうちは、高いアイテムは売
れないぞ。

* 荷車の荷物と家具は売れないぞ。

* 何か売ることができた日は、その店主の
営業実績が加算されるぞ。実績を積めば、
店主は２つまでフィートを獲得できるぞ。

* 売上げと来客数に応じてヤカポイントが
貯まるぞ。ポイントはカードから使えるぞ。

　最後になるが、床に落としたものは自動
的に商品と見なされるので、貴重な物を失
くさないように気をつけてくれ。
　売りたくない物は、見本用だとわかるよ
うに模様替えでロープパーテーションの中
に分けたり、ショーケースを被せたりしよ
う。タイル一覧の上から９段目と１０段目
にあるぞ。
%END

%8,EN
Shop Owning and Operational manual
Rewritten by Schmidt the Fence

So, you think you can own a shop? I
know, sitting on your arse all day
hawking wares seems easy enough.

But then riddle me this genius:
If it's so easy, why is there only
one shop per type in every town?

The answer is simple:
      Only the strong Survive!
(Well, that and the high taxes...)

Store operation is so difficult,
only the meanest and cut-throat can
survive in town. You however, have
an advantage over us town-shops:
     You will be outside!
And while that sounds less than ideal
right now, your monthly payments to
the crown are cut down to a mere
Five Thousand Gold Pieces a Month
(5000gp/Month)
Which is peanuts to what us city
shops have to pay, believe you me.

     -== Setting up a Shop ==-
Step 1.) Buy a deed of a shop.
 (A Mere 200,000gp at a base price.)

Step 2.) 'r'ead the deed aloud on the
spot of the world you would like it
to be built on.

Step 3.) Set up the shop (see below)

Step 4.) Caveat Emptor!

     -== Running your Shop ==-
Your shop is up and now it must be
run, which is a separate process.

First you need a shopkeeper. Now this
cannot be you, as you have to out and
get the things to sell. So you have
to go and get one of your companions
to do it. You should choose a worker
based on how good they look, and how
good a negotiator they are, as they
are the vital two things in any good
sale.

Now that you have such a goon,
go to the register in the shop.
Assign that person to the job.

The other part is also simple, to
SELL Stuff you need to HAVE stuff.
So go get stuff and and leave it in
your shop.




-== Little Golden Nuggets of Info ==-

Your Salesperson stays at the shop
and cannot come with you.

Selling stuff makes money(natch)
and also raises shop rank.

A higher shop rank brings in
customers with a fatter wallet
ready for you to empty. The pricier
items also won't sell until your
shop is of a higher rank.


The number of customers that will
stop by the shop also depends on
the shop's rank and the
shopkeeper's Charisma.

How much a customer is willing to
cough up for an item depends on the
shopkeep's Negotiation skill.

The potentials of the shopkeeper's
Negotiation skill and Charisma stat
can be topped up by spending bronze
coins at the register.

Investigate your allies to find the
prettiest and bestest negotiator.
It used to cost an arm and a leg,
but these days it's a mere 100gp.
You young 'uns are lucky.

On days that the shop sells
something, the shopkeeper will earn
experience, which can go towards
acquiring up to two special
shopkeeper feats.

That's not all! Rack up YacaPoints
based on how much you sell and how
many customers visit. Spend them
points by using the YacaPoint card,
which every shop should come with
thanks to the agreement with the
Temple of Yacatect.

Due to a vicious spat with the
local Furniture Union, we cannot
sell any spare furniture out of
town. We in town can still buy and
sell it. The same goes for cargo.
Whatever goes in your cart,
doesn't go in the shop.

Anything else, garbage, junk, even
rotten stuff can be sold if you can
find a sucker for it. If it's on
the floor, it'll be fair game to
the customers.

So if there's some item in the
shop that you don't want customers
to go layin' their paws on, you'll
want to mark it off as a display
item with a rope divider or glass
case tile. Those you can find when
redesigning the shop. They're
probably somewhere in the 9th and
10th rows in the list from the top.

Due to your shop permit, you can
ONLY sell a maximum of 10 items at
a time. You can expand on this for
a mere 2000gp for an additional
ten slots, and every subsequent
1000gp for each 10 slots after.

	-== Fiscal Information ==-
Base cost:            200,000 gp
Maintenance cost:     5,000 gp/month
Income per rank:      ??? gp/month**

**Why ??? for income? 'Cause that's
where you come in bub!

With luck, you too will be living
large like me!

Remember: The GP stops here!

Good Business to you!
%END



#####################################
%9,JP
初めての自家栽培
	written by 農民

　自給自足…素敵な響きですね。副業や趣
味でなんちゃって農業を営みたい方のため
に、簡単な自家栽培の方法を教えましょう。

　まず、なんといっても大事なのは植える
時期と場所です。時期は、雨が降っている
時が好ましく、場所はもちろん畑を選ぶべ
きです。雨の日に植えた種は枯れにくく、
畑の土は、収穫した種が新しく芽を残す可
能性を増加させます。

　種を無事に植えたら、成長を見守りまし
ょう。上手くいけば、種は土の中に根を伸
ばし、半月から一ヶ月の間に実を実らせま
す。栽培のスキルが低いうちは、途中で枯
れてしまうことも多いのですが、気を落と
さないでください。

　最後は待望の収穫です。うん、その前に
一度実の成った種は枯れることがないとい
うことを覚えておいたほうがいいですね。
収穫できるものは季節によって変わります。

　収穫は、栽培の腕がもっとも問われる瞬
間です。もしあなたのスキルが相当に高け
れば、収穫した植物がまた新たな芽を残し
てくれるかもしれません。

　コンポストに有機物を置いておくと数日
で肥料に変わります。肥料を使うと植物が
一気に成長するので、枯れるリスクも減り
ます。

　畑には作物管理セットも置いてあります。
これで管理することで、特定の植物だけが
有利になるため、収穫できるものが固定化
されます。どの作業で何が育つのかは君の
目で確認してください。

栽培の腕が上がると収穫できる野菜や果物
の品質が上がります。しかしその上質な品
を狙って野生動物がやってくるようになり
ます。一度撃退すれば、しばらくはこない
ようですが…。

ノースティリスには、奇妙な植物の種がた
くさんあります。是非、自分の畑を購入し
て自給自足の生活を満喫してください。

ps  収穫は雨の日に行った方が良いという
噂もありますよ。実際効果があるのかはハ
テナです。気分的な違いだけかも知れませ
ん。
%END

%9,EN
Easy Gardnin'
by Valentina Schmidt

Thinkin' bout growin' yer own food?
Whether yer jist lookin' ta fool
around with a bit o' herbs or ta
raise some serious garden stuff
like I have all my life, ya got the
right book.

First, ya got ta pick a time an'
place ta plant some seeds. Seeds
are best planted when it's raining
an' on field tiles. Seeds planted
during rain are gonna wilt less
often, and those planted on
a field that's found on farms an'
those abandoned ranches will leave
a new seedling behind more often
after harvest.
Once ya've planted some seeds, it's
time ta watch em grow. If yer lucky
an' all goes well, the seed will
sprout an' grow over the course of
along half a month ta a month an'
bear fruit. If yer jist starting
off an' don't got none of a
Gardnin' Skill much - then ya'll
find near all of yer crops wilting
afore harvest, but don't give up.

Lastly is what I expect is
ev'rybody's favorite part.
Harvestin'. But first, know that
any plant that has fruited ain't
gonna wilt ever until ya harvest
it. An' what ya harvest will change
with the season. Meanin' the same
plant from the same seed is gonna
give different things next season.

Harvestin' is where yer skill
matters the most. If ya got
a-plenty of it, ya'll find the crop
leavin' behind a seedlin' after
harvest more often.

Leave organic stuff on a compost
fer a few days ta turn it inta
fertilizer. Use that on yer crops
an' they'll be done growed up in no
time at all - aye, an' I really
mean no time. There won't even be
time fer em ta wilt.

Ya'll find the crop management tools
on the farm. Use it ta make only
certain types of plants grow, which
will ensure ya harvest only certain
types of items. Try it out yerself
ta see which treatment results in
what crops.

As yer Gardnin' skill increases,
the quality of fruits an' vegetables
ya harvest will increase. An' that
also means heapin' gangs of dad-
blasted wild animals are gonna come
a-visitin' like yeeks to Yowyn, so
be careful that ya don't git eat
up. Git em once an' they won't come
back fer a while though.

There's all sortsa crazy seeds an'
crops ta be found an' growed in
Norf Tyris. Good luck with your
farm, and happy tillin'!



P.S. I've heared tell that ya should
also harvest on a rainy day. Does
it actually have any effect? My
Pappy said his Pappy's Uncah
sweared up and down that it does,
but dogged if I know.
%END



#####################################
%10,JP
水を大切に！
	written by 怒りのエコちゃん

　水を捨てたりするなんてもったいない！
ちょっとした労力を費やすだけで、水は
とても貴重なアレに変わるんだから。

　何をすればいいかって？そんなこときか
ないでよ！お約束のアレよ！



%END

%10,EN
You Water Wasting Jackals! Curse you!
By Schmidt the Water Bandit

Where I come from water is life!
Waterholes are protected to the death
down to the last woman and child!

I come to this country, and what do I
see? Water, nay, LIFE, being wasted!
You people, who live in such lushes,
waste so much it's sinful!

Water should be blessed, given to all
your gods as tribute! Do you people
even know all the things you can do
with dirty water?

I suspect not.

Nor will you if you simply toss it
all away like dung from a diseased
camel.

May all who waste water wither like
grass in a drought, and may what you
issue from your loins be as sand!

Damn you all!
%END



#####################################
%11,JP
牧畜のすすめ
	written by 牧畜マスター

　ええっと…本を書くのなんて苦手なんだ
けど…印税が欲しいし…ほかにやることも
ないし…

　牧畜か…僕もロマンを求めてこの家業に
ついたけど、はじめの頃は失敗の連続だっ
た。まず第一の難関は、ブリーダーを入手
することだ。ブリーダーって何かって…？
名前の通り、どんどん子供を生む生物のこ
とさ。ブリーダーを登録しておけば、時間
の経過とともに、種は繁栄していくんだ。

　始めの頃は、野生の動物や、にわとりや
羊をお勧めするよ。基本的に野生の動物は
繁殖能力が高いんだ。モンスターは、強力
な生物ほど、繁殖する確率が低くなるみた
いだ。

　家畜は放っておいても勝手に生活するけ
れど、家畜用の餌を食べさせれば太らせる
ことできるよ。１匹に与えるよりも効果は
薄くなるけど、レジスターに餌を撒く機能
もあるから目的に応じて使いわけよう。

あと、定期的にブラッシングしてあげると
健康になって肉質もよくなるんだ。これに
は家畜用の大型ブラシと、撫でまわすため
の技能が必要になるよ。

　特別な性質を持った家畜がたまに増える
こともある。どんな性質を持っているかは
ブラッシングする時に注意して触診すれば
わかるはずさ。家畜の状態なら性質に応じ
て効果を発揮するし、ブリーダーの状態な
ら同系統の性質持ちが増えやすくなる。
　増えたばかりの家畜は小さいので、乳を
飲ませて大きくしよう。育った家畜ほど肉
や乳の品質が良くなるんだ。

　牧場の中はできるだけ綺麗にしておこう。
卵を生んだり、乳を搾る場所が必要だから。
フンは家畜の病気の元なのでこまめに処理
しようね。家畜が病気になるとフンばかり
出すし、他の家畜にも感染させてしまうよ。
病気の予防と治療には消毒が一番だけど、
用意できないなら隔離や処分も考えよう。

それと、あまり家畜の数が多すぎても、繁
殖率や卵や乳を生み出す能力が落ちてしま
うよ。２０匹ぐらいが手ごろな数かな？適
当に間引くようにしたらいい。

　増えてきた家畜をどうするかは、君次第
だ…家畜はいつでも連れ出せるから、奴隷
商人に売り払ってもいいね。従順で友好的
な家畜ほど重宝されるから、コミュニケー
ションはしっかり取ろう。
　生きたまま神に捧げるのもいいね。家畜
は古来から神に人気の供物なんだ。死体と
違って重さは関係なく、友好関係や肉質で
評価される。
　家畜を殺して肉と皮を剥ぎ取れば中々の
値段になるよ。料理ができなくても日干し
岩に置いておけば、保存性抜群の干し肉に
なるし食料に困ることはなくなるだろう。

　家畜を精肉する時、たまに他の家畜が興
奮することがあるけど、そんな時は一度牧
場から離れていれば、直に収まるよ。

　まあ…説明はこんなところだ…牧畜は大
して危険もないし、君も副業に考えてみて
はどうかな？
%END

%11,EN
A Ranching guide for the Greenhorns
	3rd Edition
	By Cattle Baron Schmidt

Howdy all! I write this guide for
the same reason I rustle cattle
about: Money. Plenty of good
royalties to be had if one takes
the time to put pen to paper.
Still, while I can't give ALL my
secrets to you as it'd put me out
of business, but I can't get you to
by my next book if I don't give at
least the basics.

To begin with, you'll at least
eighty thousand or so to purchase a
deed to a ranch. Less, if you are a
good talker or rather attractive.

Then, with deed in hand, find the
best place for it you can find.
While it cannot be within town
limits, as you do NOT want people
asking nosy questions on what
exactly it is you are breeding, or
other such moral or ethical-type
dilemmas.

Once you are at the spot of choice,
merely 'r'ead the deed and claim
your land.

-== The Joys & Perils of Breeding ==-

Good Breeding is a fine art, and is
what separates us from the savages.
No where more true is this rule
than at a ranch.

Any animal assigned to be a "breeder"
will stay on the ranch, and, in time,
produce milk, eggs, shit, and other
bits. And no, I am not going to try
to explain how mammals will lay eggs
or how exactly you milk a twenty-ton
firebreathing lizard. I don't rightly
try to answer those sort of questions
and frankly, neither should you. Just
accept the fact and move on.

Now, those items can be sold for fair
coin, but the real profit is in the
breeding and rightly so. This isn't a
farm after all. Now, with the coming
of the Etherwind, breeding has become
a very simple process. Not like the
old days, when you had to keep track
of bloodlines, and breeding seasons,
and listen to the mating howls, and
the awful thumping of not one but two
Twenty-ton Carnivores going at it.
All. Night. Long.

But I digress. Now all you do is just
assign it breeding duties, and let it
be. Soon, there will be more of them.
Mitosis? Magic? Again these are the
questions you should not rightly ask.

Generally speaking, wild animals -
chickens, sheep, rabbits and the like
- breed like rabbits. Heh. Another
thing to keep in mind is that the
more powerful a monster is, the
slower it'll breed on your ranch.
That's something to remember when
choosing what to breed if you need a
gazillion more of them.

I did say that all you have to do to
get them to breed is to leave them
to their own devices. So feeding them
is optional - I dunno they probably
eat sunlight or something - but if
you do give them a livestock feed
it'll fatten them up. Or you can use
that register on the ranch to split
that feed amongst every animal there.
Won't fill them up as much, but gets
the job done.

If you want to get really good
quality meat, what you have to do is
brush them once in a while. Grab a
big brush, and give them a nice
rubbing. Of course, you need to know
how to do the Rub special 'a'ction
in order for you to do that.

Sometimes you'll manage to breed
one of them farm animals that are
really good at something. I don't
mean maths or anything. They might
be good at putting out oodles and
oodles of milk or eggs. Or maybe
they'll have good meat or skin.
You'll know what they're good or bad
at by paying attention during
brushing. Those qualities will be
exhibited while they're on the
ranch. If they're the breeder,
they'll produce more animals with
similar qualities.

Newborns on the ranch will start out
small, so 'T'hrow some milk their way
to make sure they grow up big and
strong. If you do, the meat and milk
they give will improve.
You'll want to keep the ranch clean.
Ranch animals need space to lay eggs
and uh... milk themselves. Can't do
that if there's shit all over the
place, can they?

Leaving their shit around will cause
them to get sick and crap even more.
It'll also make the other animals
on the ranch sick. Disinfecting the
ranch will both prevent that from
happening AND heal the sick animals.
But if you can't afford that, then
you might wanna quarantine or
cull them.

It's a good idea to keep an eye on
the number of animals on the ranch.
They don't breed as fast and also
produce less milk and eggs when
the ranch is full of animals. I find
20 animals optimal number. See if
you can't find a nice balance for
your ranches too.

    -== Fruits of Your Labour ==-

Now, these... offspring, can be used
in several ways, which I shall list
below:

'i'nteract with it and get it to join
you on your travels.

Gene Engineering with zero risk to
the originals.

Profit by taking it to a slave
trader if, I might add, you know
where to go where no one asks any
questions. They fetch more if they
are tame - so you might want to make
sure they're servile and have a
decent bond with you.

Or you can kill it and the odds of
a carcass being salvageable are
much better than duking it out in
the wild.

Sacrifice it alive to your God - a
favourite of the Gods since time
immemorial. Unlike offering pieces
of a corpse on an altar, weight
won't matter here. Instead, it's
apparently scored based on the its
bond with you and the quality of
its meat.


As a side note, sometimes the ranch
animals get a little antsy when one
of them is killed. Just pop out of
the ranch and come back, and you'll
find that they have settled down.

-== The Drydock. Waste Nothing ==-

A benefit of having a ranch is having
a drydock at your disposal. Now I put
mine in the southeast corner so the
wind will blow the stench away from
my estate. I assume it will be the
same for you (you'd best hope so).
In any other trade a rotten carcass
would be nothing but a loss.




Not so with a ranch, where nothing
goes to waste. Simply dump your
rotten meat into the drydock to
cure, and in no time at all you'll
have delicious, lightweight,
adventurer-sought-after Jerky!

	-== In Conclusion ==-

At this point a wise man would stop
writing here, and just let you dream.
Simply imagine the possibilities, and
then grasp them.

In my next book, which will be soon
available, I will highlight the more
subtle tricks to the trade, like how
exactly you prevent a twenty-ton,
fire-breathing, living force of
Destruction and Death from simply
leaving the ranch after setting all
to the flame and devouring you on the
spot for asking it to sit there and
breed.

Until then Partners!
%END



#####################################
%12,JP



（文字はところどころかすれている）

レイチェル…おまえの…忘れない。

記憶が……留めるために…

おまえの病気…現代の医学……手は尽くした。

私は…なしでは…

だから

永遠に…おまえの思い出を…

秘密の庭…雪原に…

場所は…から…北に２…に４…

最愛なる妹よ…私は…

安らかに眠れ…
%END

%12,EN
[You cannot make out who owns this]
Written by Rachel's brother <damaged>

<Within this rotted book is a Letter>
<The Letter is faded Everywhere>

Rachel<damaged> I'll forget.

In order to retain memory of<damaged>

Your disease <damaged>
by modern medicine.

<damaged> himself out of hand.

No, I'm<damaged>

So

Your memories forever<damaged>

Secret Garden in the snowy field...

The location is the north 2<damaged>
And from the 4<damaged>

My sister is<damaged>
Requiescat in pace...
%END



#####################################
%13,JP
ピラミッドへの招待状
	written by ピラミッドの主ツェン

　貴殿を名のある勇者として、我がピラミ
ッドに迎え入れよう。

　これは一種の遊びと考えてもらえればい
い。貴殿の勇知を持って、ツェン家の偉大
なる祖先が作り上げた迷宮を、見事に攻略
できるのか。あるいは、数多の勇者と同じ
く、戦いに敗れピラミッドの土と化すのか。

　むろん、この迷宮にはその危険に見合う
だけの財宝が隠されていることも、明記し
ておこう。

　ああ、それともう一つ。葬儀の予約を取
る必要はない。我がピラミッドに眠る守護
者達が、貴殿の肉体を綺麗に食べつくして
くれるから。
%END

%13,EN
You have been cordially invited hero,
RSVP not required, but come prepared.

<This has been written on papyrus>

You have gotten a bit of a name for
yourself young one, and you are even
now growing stronger. Soon I, in my
age beyond ages, might not be a match
for you. And sensibly, I won't take
that risk later. But I do so love a
fresh challenge every now and then.

So hear this.

Seek my Pyramid! Challenge my maze!

Of course you should have a reason
more than simply my word of challenge.

How about treasure? Ah, I knew that
would do it. Within my Labyrinth lies
much treasure if you can find it. It
lies within much risk, but any reward
without risk is hollow and cold as is.

And there is what I carry as well,
though I feel it fair to warn you
that I have played this game for a
long, long time and have yet to lose.

Oh and one more thing, should you not
be properly entered within the great
Book of the Dead before entering,
those within shall ensure that you
become so, promptly indeed.

Face me if you dare!

%END



#####################################

%14,JP
カードゲームルール（暫定）
	written by カードマスター

・各プレイヤーは３０枚のカードからなる
デッキを持ちゲームを開始する。

・カードは基本的にクリーチャーとスペル
の２種類に分別される。

・カードはそれぞれ神の領域（ドメイン）
により分類され、プレイヤーはカードゲー
ム内に限り、デッキに存在するドメインの
神を信仰する。

・プレイヤーの開始ライフと開始配布カー
ドの数は、デッキに存在するドメインの種
類の数に反比例する（多くの神を信仰する
と力が弱まる）。

・先に相手のライフを０にしたプレイヤー
が勝利する。ドローする時点でデッキのカ
ードがない場合、プレイヤーのライフは０
になる。

・ゲーム開始時にはデッキから一定数のカ
ードが配られる。

・プレイヤーのターンは開始、ドロー、メ
イン、終了の４つのフェイズから構成され
る。プ

・プレイヤーは自分の開始フェイズにマナ
収入の分だけマナを得る。また、自分の場
の全てのクリーチャーのＨＰは最大値まで
回復し、行動済みのクリーチャーは再び行
動可能になる。

・プレイヤーは自分のドローフェイズに１
枚のカードをドローする。

・７枚持った時点でドローした場合、手持
ちの左端のカードが墓地に送られる。

・プレイヤーは、自分のメインフェイズで、
マナを消費しカードを場に出すことができ、
スペルカードや能力をプレイすることがで
き、クリーチャーを攻撃させることができ
る。

・消費コストの背景が虹色のカードは、そ
のコストの数だけ、同じドメインの土地カ
ードが場に出ていなければプレイできない。

・プレイヤーは、自分のメインフェイズに、
手持ちのカードを１ターンに１枚だけ神に
捧げることができる。捧げられたカードは、
そのドメインの土地カードに変化し、自分
の場に置かれる。さらに、１のマナを得る。

・土地に変化したカードは、そのゲームが
終了するまで土地のカードとして扱われる。
土地は１枚につき１のマナ収入を生む。

・破壊されたカードと詠唱が終わったスペ
ルは墓地に送られる。デッキのカードがな
くなると、プレイヤーはそれ以上ドローで
きない。

・土地以外のカードは場に８枚までしか出
すことができない。場に空きがないときは、
いかなるカードもプレイできない。

・クリーチャーは攻撃、防御、スキル使用
のいずれか１つを実行後、行動済みになり、
次の自分のターンまで行動できない。

・召喚されたクリーチャーはそのターンは
行動済みとして扱われるが、防御だけはで
きる。

・クリーチャーに攻撃を指示した場合、相
手のプレイヤーのライフに攻撃することが
できる。

・防御側のプレイヤーは、自分の場に行動
済みでないクリーチャーがいる場合、相手
クリーチャーの攻撃を防御できる。

・攻撃が防御された場合、防御側のプレイ
ヤーのライフは減らないが、防御したクリ
ーチャーは、相手クリーチャーの攻撃力の
分、ＨＰにダメージを受ける。同時に、攻
撃側のクリーチャーも、相手クリーチャー
の攻撃力分、ＨＰにダメージを受ける。

・クリーチャーで防御する代わりに、防御
側のプレイヤーは、マナが足りていれば手
札からカードを１枚プレイできる。

・クリーチャーはＨＰが０になると場から
消滅し墓地に送られる。

・操作の説明
決定キー	選択
キャンセルキー	スキップターン/防御
sキー		降伏

・カードの説明
左上（赤）攻撃力
右上（緑）ＨＰ
左下（青）プレイ時消費マナ
右下（灰）スキル使用時消費マナ

・プレイヤーカードの説明
上（緑）ライフ
下（青）所持マナ/毎ターンのマナ収入

・コスト０のクリーチャーは未実装。

・スペルカードを手に入れるには、主に店
で売られているブースターパックを使用す
る。パックにはランダムな５枚のカードが
含まれている。パックの購入など、カード
関係の売買は「トレード・トークン(TT)」
という通貨によって行われる。TTは、主に
冒険者とのデュエルや大会の試合の結果に
よって増減する。

%END

%14,EN
Action! Adventure! It's Card Battles!
<By DeckMaster Schmidt>

Have you been looking for a game that
your kids can play that doesn't
involve lawn darts, a dead yeek, and
a bit of twine?

WELL SEEK NO MORE!

Coming Soon to the Country of North
Tyris, a brand new game involving
gathering cards, duels, and bizarre
hairstyles that require exstensive
Gene-engineering to even be possible!

Sequal to the once popular game
Monster Duels, which is in turn
the sequal to Wizards & Magic!

Become the King of Games!

Each player starts the game with
a deck of 30-60 creature Cards

There are 6 Domains, you starting
hand number and life is inversely
proportional to the number of Domains.
(Neutral and Legendary doesn't count.)

Up to X copies of same card allowed:
Normal:X=4 Neutral:X=2 Legendary:X=1

The first player to reduce their
opponent's life to 0 wins. If there
are no cards in the deck at the time
of the draw, the player's life is
reduced to 0.


There are 4 phases:
- Begin Phase - Draw Phase
- Main Phase - End Phase

Begin Phase:
Activate all turn-start effect.
Unexhaust all cards on the Field.
Player's Mana restore to max Mana.

Draw Phase:
Player draw 1 card.
Activate all in-hand effect.

During Main Phase, you can:
Spend the Mana Cost to play Cards.
Sacrifice a Card to gain 1 max Mana.
Attack with your creatures.

End Phase:
Activate all turn-end effect.
Card action:
Card are exhausted upon summon.
Exhausted card cannot attack, but
they can defend incoming attacks.
Attacked creatures cannot block
until next Begin Phase.
Creatures with 0 health after
combat is send to graveyard.

Controls:
Enter Key: Select.
Cancel Key: Skip Turn / Defense
/ Randomize Effect Target.
s Key: Surrender
UP: Play / Attack / Defend.
DOWN: Sacrifice Card.

Card Description:
Top: Card Mana Cost
Bottom: Attack / Health

Skill Keywords:

Battlecry: Activate when Summoned.
Deathrattle: Activate when Graved.
Sacrifice: Activate when Sacrificed.
On-Draw: Activate when draw this.
In-Hand: Activate after draw phase.
Ongoing: Activate passively on Field.
Aftercombat: Activate after combat,
On-Kill: Activate after combat,
when opponent is defeated and this
card survives.








Positive Card Bits:

- Regeneration: HP restore to max
in Begin Phase.
- Armor: Negate positive damage once.
- Flying: Cannot be blocked by
creature without flying or reach.
- Intimidate: Can only be blocked by
Cards within the same Domain.
- Reach: Can block flying Cards.
- Lifelink: Give player life=damage.
- Haste: Not Exhausted on Summon.
- Trample: Deal player excess damage.
- First-Strike: Deal damage on the
first round of combat only.
- Dual-Strike: Deal damage in the
first round and normal round.
- Deathtouch: Damage to Card +999.


Positive Card Bits:

- Windfury: First Attack won't exhaust.
- Vigilance: Can always block.
- Defender: Always block. No attack.
- Critical: Attackx3 with 1/6 chance.
- Barrier: Receive no effect damage.
- Evasion: Opponent cannot target it.
- Split: Summon a copy if survive.
- Rider: Armor/+2 Attack. Lose this
bit and 2 health when damaged.









Negative Card Bits:

- Deathword: Grave this after 3 turn.
- Gravity: Can always be blocked.
- Bleeding: Take +1 Damage.
- Poisoned: Take 1 Damage Begin Phase.
- Kamikaze: Battlecry - Kill itself.
- Paralysed: Cannot defend this turn.
- Frozen: Cannot attack this turn.
- Silenced: Effect cannot activate.
- Confused: Cannot Attack/Defend or
use Effect this turn. Doesn't Exhaust.
- Insane: Switch side upon second
time inflicted with Insane.


%END



#####################################

%15,JP
ダンジョン運用マニュアル
	written by ダンジョンマスター

　もっと、まってね！



















　まってね！

%END

%15,EN
Seek Ye the Secretes of yon Dungeons?
<Schmidt the XVII, Duke of Intrigue>

Then send ten gold to:
Spelunkers Monthly Scrolls
Care Of:
Samisel
South Tyris, Elona
%END

#####################################
%16,JP
隠されしムジャフの定理
	written by カイン

しかたがない、全てを話そう。あの街がガレ
キの山に変わった日だ…私はあきらめてチ
ャンスを待ったが完全に無駄だったらしい。
ライオンとの度重なる死闘は彼女の右脇腹
を確実に蝕んではいなかったのだ。ああ…
願わくばここから逃げたい。逃げるぜ！捕ま
えてみやがれコンチクショー！（続かない）













異なる世界からの侵略者は我々のすぐ近くで
形を変え力を蓄えている。奴らが凶暴なだけ
の観光客だったらまだ救いはあったのだが。
神は常に試練を与えてくるものだ。これには
殿様も姫様も豚も乞食も思わず苦笑い。顔面
かきむしって血塗れの人々なんか見せられた
ら頭おかしくなるだろう。そして悲しいこと
に、彼女はもう戻ってこない…。あの時どう
していたらよかった？つらいから全部忘れて
へらへら笑って生きよう。はは、急に空から
10億gpくらい降ってこないかなぁ？（終わり）


%END

%16,EN
Wily Mujaf's Thesis
	by <Caim>

I saw the town get turned into a
smouldering pile of rubble. I was
hoping for just one more chance.
Fact is, I didn't get it. Because
over and over again she fought lions,
refusing to die. Look, her rib cage's
still intact and everything. Didn't
eat into it at all. Good as new.
Crazy stuff, if you ask me. Now, you
receive four options. First is
especially attractive and will not
try to kill you. Next up, stunning...
character to go with her looks. Third
has a habit of lazing around. Lastly,
a loyal mage who will go walk over
red-hot embers for you. I wish I were
anywhere but here. Actually, I
CAN run away. RIGHT NOW. Alright,
time to haul butt. You guys aren't
ever taking me alive. I'm gonna keep
running. Over and out.
















10 thousand gp. More than enough to
wash away everything. I want to
forget these memories that are still
raw. Seems like it was just the
other day when it happened. But as
much I would like to forget, I can't.
Could I have stopped everything that
happened? She's never coming back
anyway. I would have gone insane
over the sight of people bleeding,
scratching their faces off. Flecks of
skin flying. It was quite the
headache for everyone in town, from
royalty to the peasants. Now
if only aliens were violent tourist
neighbours, storing shapeshifting
energy. Watching. Waiting. (The end.)
%END





#####################################
%17,JP
ネフィア症候群
	written by ザナン精神科医

　ネフィア症候群とは、ネフィア内で発症
することがある一種の精神障害である。

・症状
　大きく３つの進行段階が存在し、後の物
ほど重篤になりやすい。


ステージ１
　判断力が低下する。
　低下具合は個人差があるものの、一般的
に、落ちている有益な道具を無視する、
多数の敵の中に飛び込む、といった行動
をとるようになる。と言っても、街での
日常生活には支障がないレベルであり、
この状態で活動する冒険者も多い。

ステージ２
　認識力が低下し、一部のオブジェクト
に至っては完全に視認できなくなる。
　階段を認識できなくなることが多く、
その場合ネフィアから自力で家へ帰ること
が非常に困難になる。

ステージ３
　攻撃性が増幅される。
　この段階になると同族だろうと元仲間
だろうと積極的に攻撃するようになる。
　原理は不明であるが、ステージ３同士で
戦うことは基本的にない。
　発症した者同士で群れを形成することも
あるため、お互いを認識できないわけでは
ないようだ。
　元から攻撃性が極めて低い者はこの段階に
達しても変化がみられない。


　ステージ２以降の者はネフィア内を徘徊し
続け、いずれネフィアとともに地殻に沈む
ことになるが、徘徊している間に偶然外に
出てしまうことも少なくない。

・原因など
　ネフィアの持つ魔力を原因とする説、
特殊な磁場を原因とする説、の二つが有力
だが、明確な結論は出ていない。
　長居すればするほど症状が悪化する傾向に
あるが、個人差が非常に大きい。
　特に冒険者と呼ばれる者たちは発症しても
ステージ１どまりのことが多く、そもそも
発症しない者も多数である。
　というより、重篤化しない体質の者だけが
冒険者として活動できていると言ったほう
が正しい。

・対策について
　治療法は確立されていない。
　しかし、耐性のある体質の者が仲間に
いると他の者も発症しにくいという研究
データがある。
　また、統率者を失った部隊が集団で発症
した例もあり、精神的な要の有無が大きい
とされる。
　一度発症してもネフィアを離れることで
症状が改善するケースもある。

・一般認識
　ネフィアが危険であることは古代から
広く知られているが、理由としてこの症候群
の存在を挙げられる者は少ない。
　ネフィアに棲息するモンスターさえ処理
できれば何も危険はないという誤解も多く、
侵入した腕自慢が発症してしまうケースが
昔から後を絶たない（＊１）。
　一部の国では立ち入りを法で禁じたり、
軍が管理を行うなどの対策が取られている
がまだまだ不十分である。















＊１　
　最古の記録は、クジャラートで発見された
およそ三千年前の文献である。ネフィア内で
おかしくなってしまった英雄が「迷宮憑き」
と恐れられ、最後には処刑されている。


%END

%17,EN
A Review on Nefian Psychosis
	by a Zanan Psychologist

Nefian Psychosis is a mental disorder
that develops in some people when
they are within a Nefia (commonly
known as a dungeon).

       -=Signs and symptoms=-
The disorder presents itself in three
stages, each of which are described
below, with the latter stages being
more serious.

       -=Stage 1 psychosis=-
Characterized by lowered cognitive
ability. The decrease in cognitive
ability varies between patients, but
they will typically be lacking in
their object recognition ability and
ignore useful items on the ground or
charge blindly into enemies.

Nevertheless, many adventurers are
able to maintain a high quality of
life in towns while afflicted with
this stage of the disorder.

       -=Stage 2 psychosis=-
Extremely low object recognition
ability, with a complete inability
to recognize some classes of objects.
Many afflicted by this stage of the
disorder are unable to recognize
staircases, and experience great
difficulty in finding their way home.




       -=Stage 3 psychosis=-
Marked by increased aggressiveness.
At this stage, patients actively
target and exhibit aggression towards
other people, including acquaintances
and former allies. For reasons yet
unknown, Stage 3 patients do not
attack one another.

Some of the afflicted band together
to form working groups, so it appears
that they are somehow able to
recognize one another. It has also
been observed that individuals who
displayed no aggressive behaviour
before the onset of the disorder do
not display any aggression whatsoever
even at this stage.

Many individuals suffering from Stage
2 psychosis may get trapped in
dungeons, but there are many reports
of such individuals suddenly
reappearing aboveground when the
dungeon sinks into the crust.

          -=Hypothesis=-
Two hypotheses have offered to
explain this phenomenon, namely that
it results either from exposure to
mana in dungeons or to a particular
type of magnetic field. Neither of
these explanations, however, have
proved to be completely satisfactory.
Though is indeed a strong and
positive correlation between the
amount of time spent in dungeons and
the severity of psychosis, it does
not account for the high variability
in the speed and severity of onset of
psychosis between individuals.

Many afflicted adventurers also never
progress beyond Stage 1, and many
more never develop psychosis at all.
It is possible that individuals who
become adventurers are inherently less
likely to be predisposed to the
disorder.

 -=Prevention of Nefian Psychosis=-
There is no cure for Nefian Psychosis
at the time of writing. However,
research has shown that recruiting
allies who are not predisposed to
psychosis can offer some protection
against the disorder. There has also
been a case where an entire group of
individuals developed the disorder
after losing their commander, so it
is commonly thought that mood and
the mental state of individuals
play an important part in both
the progression and prevention of
the disorder.

Some individuals also experience an
improvement in their condition after
avoiding dungeons for a period of
time.

       -=Public perception=-
The notion that dungeons are
dangerous is well-entrenched in
society since ancient times, but few
will associate Nefian Psychosis
with that danger. It is a common
misconception that dungeons are
innocuous without the monsters that
reside within them, as there have
been many documented cases of
skilled dungeon-delvers coming down
with the disorder since ancient
times (see footnote 1).

For that reason, some countries
forbid entrance to dungeons while
others limit dungeon access to
the military, but these measures
still fall short of preventing
cases of Nefian Psychosis.









Footnote 1:
The earliest record of such a case
was an inscription discovered in
Kjaraht, dating back to 3000 years
ago. A well-known dungeon conquerer
became deranged and it was suspected
that he was possessed by a dungeon,
leading to his eventual execution.
%END


#####################################
%18,JP
贈り物のマナー
	written by 旅好き商人

　あなたは物を相手に渡したい時、どうして
いますか？置くのが面倒でついつい手渡し
してしまうことはありませんか？
　相手が親しい間柄だったり、とても急いで
いる時は仕方ありませんが、年配の方には
手渡しを気にする人が結構いるもの。
　ほとんどの地域では、失礼の無いように
そっと相手の足元に転がすのがマナーとなっ
ています。もちろん家族にはそこまでしなく
ても構いませんけどね。

　少し気を付けてほしいのは、アセリア
大陸の一部地域では足元に転がすのが逆に
失礼にあたる場合があることです。ここで
見知らぬ人に手渡しをされても、怒っては
いけません。

　ところ変わればマナーも変わる。観光に
行く際はその地域のマナーをしっかり確認
しておきましょう。



%END

%18,EN
Gifting Gifts
	by a Travelling Merchant

What is it that you do when you would
like to give someone a gift? Do you
sometimes get lazy and give it to
them by hand instead of placing it
at their feet?

If it's for someone close like a Soul
Mate, or if you are in a terrible
hurry, then that's fair enough.
However, many of the elderly find it
rather offensive to be handed items.

It is polite to place items at
peoples' feet in most areas. Of
course, you don't have to go that far
for your family members.

One thing you should keep in mind is
that it is rude to place items at
peoples' feet in parts of the
Asserian continent. When visiting
these areas, you must not get angry
when strangers pass items to you by
hand.

Like they say, when in Palmia, do as
the Palmians do. Remember, always
read up on the culture before
visiting a place!
%END


#####################################
%19,JP
集団活動訓練
	written by 引率教官

　今日はみんな二人で一組のタッグになっ
て行動してもらいます。

　はいっ！仲のいい同士で組んでみよう。
左が移動を担当しなさい。

　タッグで戦闘する時は、組んでいる
相手の動きをよく見ておいて！
特に、強敵戦での立ち回りはきっといい
経験になるだろうから。

　攻撃を受ける時は、なるべくその時点で
体力の多い方が、もう一人を庇うこと。
　それと、拾ったお金は独り占めせずに
仲良く二人で分けるように！

　はい、そこ転ばないように同じ速度で
歩く！あー二人で足を結ぶ必要は無いぞ。

　あれ？君は相手がいなかったのか。
じゃあ一緒にタッグを組もうか。



%END

%19,EN
An Exercise in Team-Building
	by Lead Instructor

For today's practice, you will be
pairing up with someone else to form
a tag team.

Now grab a buddy. The one on the left
will be in charge of movement.

If you're fighting a battle in a tag
team, watch how your partner moves.
If you're fighting someone strong,
pay special attention to how you move
during the fight, and I guarantee
you'll learn lots from it.

When taking fire, whoever has the
most health at that moment should
take damage for the other. And don't
forget! Split any gold you pick up
with your partner.

Walk at the same speed to make sure
you don't trip. You there, you don't
have to tie your legs together! Put
that rope away.

What? You don't have a partner?
Alright, you can tag with me.
%END


#####################################
%20,JP
冒険暮らし　＜518／春号＞
	written by メイドさん１２才

　冒険生活に役立つお得な情報を、みなさ
 まの背中を日々見届ける新人メイドが紹介
いたします。

　我が家にとって無くてはならない、よく
使う家具を訊ねられたら、あなたは何から
思い浮かべますか。
 　寝具、調理器具、収納具など。どれも
我が家での生活を豊かにしてくれるものば
かりです。

　家具の中には＜使う＞ことで効果を発揮
するものが幾つかあります。冷蔵庫や本棚
などの収納具は、生活空間にゆとりを持た
せられますので活用していきたいですね。

　新たな物件で心機一転を図る前に、まず
 は一度我が家をじっくりと見渡しながら
整理してみることをお勧めいたします。



%END

%20,EN
Adventurers Quarterly (Spring 518)
	by Edelia the maid, age 12

Hello there. I am Edelia the maid.
How do you do? Today I bring to you
advice that will hopefully prove to be
of use in your adventures.

There are many types of furniture
that are indispensable to every
home. No home should be without beds,
cooking utensils, and storage
containers.

Some furniture like bookshelves can
be used as a (t)ool. Yet others -
fridges for example - are storage
containers that can be (o)pened.
These will prove useful in keeping
your home clutter-free.

Before buying a new deed and moving
house for a change of pace, how about
looking over your house and seeing
if you can't sort things out?

%END


#####################################
%21,JP
恨みのノート
	written by ザナン研究員

　今日、所長に呼ばれたから何事かと思っ
たら、別研究所への転属命令だった。
　昆虫兵器の研究は今が山場だ。下っ端と
は言え、ここで担当者の俺が抜けたら人手
が足りない。しかも転属先は細菌での人体
強化を研究しているところだという。
なんだか危なさそうだ…。
　断固拒否したが、決定事項ということで
軽くあしらわれてしまった。心底許せねぇ。
---------------------------------------

　新しい研究所は、前にもましてイカれた
連中だらけだった。素体をどこから集めて
きたのかと思えば、詐欺行為で破産させた
家庭から無理やり買い取ってきたらしい。
よく見るとまだ子供の被験者までいやがる。
心底許せねぇ。
　詐欺で集めた金で予算が浮きまくりだと
所長が嬉しそうに話してやがった。なんて
職場だ！こんなところで働くことを考える
と…他国に亡命してやりたい気分だ。
　だが武装した守衛が目を光らせている。
バイオハザードに備えてか、アリの子一匹
這い出る隙間もありゃしねぇ。守衛を薙ぎ
倒すか、壁を破るかしないと出られそうに
ない…。
---------------------------------------

　被験者たちは個室という名の独房に入れ
られ、番号で呼ばれ、監視されていた。ま
るで囚人じゃないか。詐欺に引っかかった
だけで何も悪くないのに、と先輩どもにこ
ぼしたら、騙される方が悪いと抜かしやが
る。
　挙句、同情したなら仲良くお喋りしてこ
い、と無理やり今夜の被験者チェック当番
を押し付けられた。心底許せねぇ。
---------------------------------------

　渋々チェックに行くと、俺に気づいた被
験者たちが口々に俺を罵ってきた。俺は彼
らに何もしていないのだが、彼らからして
みれば敵なのだろう。何が仲良くお喋りし
てこいだ。
　帰り際、廊下の奥からすすり泣きと、
それを慰める声が聞こえてきた。そういえ
ば兄妹が隣り合わせで収容されているとい
う話だったか。
　胸を抉られる想いだったが、戻って話を
して、責められるのが怖かった。…俺は、
こんな自分が心底許せねぇ。
---------------------------------------

　なんてこった、ここで研究されていたの
はメシェーラの人体制御だった！一応細菌
には違いないが、軍に提出されている資料
と違うじゃないか。
　どうもメシェーラの研究をしようとして
一度止められているようだ。それでも現在
秘密裏に研究しているということは、多大
な成果でもって軍を黙らせる気なのだろう。
　まだ埃が出てきそうだ。もう少し探って
みるか。
---------------------------------------

　メシェーラをどうやって制御するのかと
思ったら、神経系の強化が主らしい。肉体
の変質についてはノータッチで、逆にそれ
をそのまま利用するようだ。
　細菌が神経侵食して勝手に身体を動かす
ので、それを人体改造と薬物投与により防
止するということらしい。今のところは、
全員改造手術済みの段階とのこと。
　理は適っているが、それでは成功した際
に被験者が言うことを聞かず暴れだすので
はないか？と思ったら、どうも実際にその
技術を利用するのは兵士らしい。被験者は
あくまで捨て駒であり技術が確立できたら
ガスで処分されるんだとさ。心底許せねぇ。
---------------------------------------

　今日は所内が大わらわだった。昼から急
に軍本部の査察が入ることになったらしい。
よほど焦りがあるのか、新入りの俺にも隠
蔽を手伝わせる始末だ。その過程で知って
しまった。反吐が出るくらい心底許せねぇ
黒い問題がわしゃわしゃ出てきやがる。
　俺は作業をしながら、それらを頭に叩き
込んでいった。
---------------------------------------

　査察に来たのは、なんとあの紅の英雄の
部下らしい。紅の英雄と言えば普通に有名
な軍人だが、研究員の間ではもっぱら生体
兵器の有用性に疑問を持っていることで有
名だ。かくいう俺も昆虫兵器の予算を削ら
れた苦い思い出がある。
　何だっていい、この腐り切った研究所を
潰すチャンスだ！急いであらん限りの問題
点を書き記し、帰り際の査察官にこっそり
渡すことに成功した。なんとか間に合った。
　これは内部告発ってやつだな。こっちに
来てから缶詰状態で外部と連絡が取れない
から、こうするしかない。
　後は俺が告発したことがバレず、被験者
たちが犠牲になる前にカタがつくのを祈る
だけだ…。
---------------------------------------

　まずい。所長がよほど今回の査察に焦り
を感じたのか、急遽実験が前倒しになった。
　くそ、先輩どもが実験準備をしろと呼ん
でいやがる。何か手はないのか！



---------------------------------------

　…結局、俺は咄嗟に工作することもでき
ず指示通り準備するしかなかった。
　全被験者のメシェーラが活性化された後、
薬が投与された。改造されていない人間な
ら一発で廃人、という劇薬はダテではない
らしく、すぐに全員苦しみだした。メシェ
ーラのほうの作用かもしれないが。
　俺以外の研究員は全員、期待の眼差しで
苦しむ被験者たちを眺めていやがる。兵器
開発に携わる俺に人道を語る資格はないが、
なんだか無性に腹が立つ。心底許せねぇ。
---------------------------------------

　実験から２時間が経過し、変化が現れた。
ある者は体色が変化し、ある者は触手が生
えつつある。彼らは所長の言葉を借りれば
「適合率の低い屑」らしい。屑はお前だ。
　他の被験者が苦しんでいる中、１４番だ
けがぶっ倒れたままピクリとも動かない。
身体は一切変異していないので適合したの
だと思われるが、奇妙だ。指示を受け、調
査のため彼を別室に運び込むことになった。
　仕方ねぇな、ちょっと行ってくるか。
---------------------------------------

　俺たちが隔離区画から運び出した瞬間、
１４番が飛び起きた！いわゆる死んだふり
だったようだ。古典的な手だが、この状況
では効果てきめんだった。
　１４番は信じられないほどの怪力で守衛
をぶっ飛ばし、攻撃を受けても瞬時に再生
してみせた。
　彼なら正面突破で強行的に脱出できるの
ではないか？そう思った俺は、咄嗟に出口
を指差して叫んだ。逃がすな、出口の守り
を固めろと。
　１４番は出口の位置を理解してくれたよ
うで、集まってきた守衛を薙ぎ倒して出て
行った。うまくいったぜ。
---------------------------------------

　あああああああああ！俺の馬鹿ああ！！
あれだけ強ければこの研究所を一人で制圧
できたかもしれないのに！
　１４番は追跡から逃れたらしいが、研究
所のセキュリティレベルが大幅に強化され
てしまった。これでは１６番…彼の妹を助
けにくることも難しいだろう。
　なにがうまくいったぜ、だ。どうして俺
はあの時そこまで考えられなかったんだ。
心底許せねぇ…。
---------------------------------------

　今、俺は人間の醜さに嫌気がさしている。


　実験から１２時間が過ぎ、他に適合者が
いるかもしれないということで再び見回り
が行われた。俺もそのメンバーだ。
　適合者がいたらどうやって隔離区画から
出そうかと考えながら独房の前まで来たが、
驚愕することになった。
　既に被験者たちの身体は変異して繭のよ
うな姿になっていた。他の研究員が叫んだ。
この形態は想定外、１２時間でここまで変
異するのも想定外、と。
　慌てて外の連中に無線で状況を伝えた直
後、大きな音が鳴り始めた。何かと思って
辺りを見回した俺たちは、区画の隔壁が降
りていくのを目にした。最後尾の研究員が
慌てて駆け寄るも、隔壁は完全に降りてし
まった。
　無線に、応答はない。
---------------------------------------

　絶望する俺たちに、繭は容赦なく触手で
襲いかかってきた。どうにか全員致命傷を
避けて隔壁付近まで後退したが、このまま
では誰も助からない。
　奥の方から、何か衝撃音が聞こえる。
被験者が暴れて、壁でも叩いているのか？
様子が気になったが、さすがに触手を掻い
潜って奥まで行く勇気はなかった。
　発狂して笑い出すやつや、隅の方で塞ぎ
込むやつを尻目に、俺はこの文章を書いて
いる。
---------------------------------------

　くそ　外の連中、ガスまきやがったな
身体まひしてき　手がしび　れ　うま
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　く
かけな　い　

　　おれこのま　ま死ぬの　か

こんな　の　心底　ゆる　　
　　　　　　　　　　　　せ



%END

%21,EN
Bitter Last Words
	of a Zanan Researcher

The chief called me in today. Turns
out I'm going to be transferred to
another research facility. Why?
We're so close to perfecting our
weaponized insects! I may be low on
the management hierarchy, but I'm
still the one in charge of my team.
We're not going to have enough
people here if I get transferred.
What's worse is that this facility
I'm going to is conducting research
on bacterial human augmentation.
That term itself gives me the chills.

This is an order so I can't just say
no to it, but it really pisses me
off how they made that decision
without consulting me. And now
they mention it to me in passing
as if it were no big deal.

Damn it.















        -------------------

The people at this new facility are
crazy. And considering where I used
to work, that's saying a lot. I
wondered where they were getting
their subjects from. Turns out they
swindled money from people, then
forced them to sell their family
members when they couldn't pay up.

I can't believe that they're
experimenting on kids too.

Damn these people.

How do I know this? Because the
chief was so happy after counting
the gold he had siphoned off of
families that he just had to tell me
about it. Can you believe that? I'm
seriously thinking of defecting to
another country, because there is
no way I want to work here.

I can't escape though. The armed
guards are always watching. They
call it the biohazard containment
protocol, and it's so strict that
not even an ant could get out from
here. I'd have to overpower the
guards somehow or punch a hole in
the wall in order to get out...







        -------------------

The subjects are referred to by
numbers, held in single cells (which
they call "Suites"), and are kept
under constant surveillance. They're
prisoners, guilty of nothing except
for the sin of falling for a scam.

I told that to a co-worker of mine,
and he said that it's their fault
for falling for it. He seriously
said that.

To top it off, they just stuck
inspection duty on me. Saying that
I could go chat with them if I
liked them so much.

Damn these people.
        -------------------

So I sucked it up and did the
inspection rounds. The subjects
cussed at me the moment they saw me.
I didn't do anything to them, but I
guess I'm the enemy from their
perspective. So much for chatting
with them, huh. While heading back,
I heard someone sobbing in the cell
at the end of the corridor and what
sounded like someone else trying to
console the person who was crying.
I did hear something about a pair
of siblings - brother and sister to
be exact - having their cells next
to each other.



It's heartbreaking, but I can't
possibly tell anyone or do anything
about that. I'm such a coward.

Damn myself.















        -------------------

You have got to be kidding me. They
are trying to control human-meshera
homunculi here! I mean, it
technically IS bacteria, but it's
completely different from what the
reports we're sending to the
military say!

They tried to research meshera once
but the plug got pulled on it. The
fact that they're doing it in secret
now must mean they're be looking to
find results important enough to
make the military shut up.

There's probably more to this. I'm
going to keep looking.

        -------------------

Seems like they plan on controlling
the meshera with altered nerve
fibres. They expose the body to
meshera and allow it to transform,
then use it like a puppet when it's
done.

The bacteria assumes motor control
and attempts to move the body when
it invades the nerves, and they
prevent that with drugs and surgical
intervention. They have already
completed the surgery on every
subject here.

This works in theory, but what if
the subjects go out of control
after the procedure is done? Turns
out the subjects get culled with gas
after the procedure. They're going
to use this on soldiers only after
they get the technique right.

Damn it. This is unforgivable.














        -------------------

Everybody is running around with
their hair on fire today. I heard
the big shots from the military's
HQ are inspecting this place in the
afternoon. They must be really
desperate to hide everything,
because even a newcomer like me got
roped in to help cover up. And
thanks to that, I now know just how
far they went in their research.
Damn this place to hell. The stuff
they do here is so sickening that I
feel like throwing up. This research
is off the deep end.

I've memorized the documents I saw
today.

        -------------------

The person who came to inspect
turned out to be a subordinate of
the Crimson Hero. The Crimson of
Zanan is quite famous as a military
man, but in the research circles he's
famous for his mistrust of biological
weapons. He's the very same person
who cut my insect research budget
down to nothing.

Anyway. This is my chance to make
this hellhole disappear! I scribbled
down everything I knew about this
place on to a piece of paper and
managed to slip it to the inspector
as he was leaving.


Guess this is what they call
whistleblowing. This is all I can
do. I've been cooped up in this
place ever since I got here. Time to
pray that they don't find out I was
the one to report it, and that they
get here before the subjects get
sacrificed...












        -------------------

This is bad. The chief must feel
that something is wrong with
upcoming inspection, because he
pushed the experiment forward. Damn,
they're already calling me, telling
me to get ready to start the
experiment. I have to do something!











        -------------------

I couldn't do anything. Didn't have
time to do anything. Could only
follow orders. After the subjects'
meshera was activated, we
administered the drugs.

The drugs were unfortunately not
potent enough to turn people into
vegetables, and all of them started
writhing in pain. Or it could have
been due to the meshera. I don't
know.

All the other researchers looked at
the writhing subjects expectantly.
It's probably not my place to say
this because I'm a weapons
researcher, but their indifference
pisses me off.

Damn these people. Damn them all.

















        -------------------

Two hours after the experiment began,
the changes began to show. Some of
subjects' bodies began to change
colour while others grew tentacles.
The chief called them "low-
compatibility trash". Well guess
what, you're the ones who are trash.
While all other subjects were
convulsing, Subject #14 just keeled
over and stopped moving. His body
remained unchanged so they assumed
he was compatible, but something
seemed off to me. He was wheeled
off into another room for further
examination. Alright, I gotta go too.



        -------------------

The moment we carried him into
another room, Subject #14 leapt up.
Seems like he was just playing dead.
Oldest trick in the book, but it
sure was effective.

With his superhuman strength, he
tossed the guards away as if they
were rag dolls, and his wound healed
instantaneously.

Could he be strong enough to force
his way out of this compound? I
shouted at the guards and told
them to guard the door, pointing
at the exit.

It seemed like #14 understood,
because he made a beeline towards
the exit while mowing down the guards
on his way out. Alright.

















        -------------------

Damn it, I'm an idiot! He could've
cleaned out the entire complex by
himself if he was that strong!

#14 had evaded his pursuers, but the
security alarm has been set off.
Rescuing #16 - his sister - is going
to be a lot more difficult now.

Why did I not thing of this? Damn
it, I'm such an idiot!







        -------------------

People disgust me. I'm sick and
tired of everything.

It's been 12 hours since the
experiment. Some people including
myself were sent off to look to see
if there were any other compatible
subjects.

My head was filled with thoughts of
how I was going to escape from the
quarantine facility if there was
another compatible subject there.
Before I knew it, I had already
arrived at the suites, and I was not
prepared for what I saw there.


The subjects' bodies had transformed
into cocoons. The other researchers
were shouting something. That this
was too fast and that they shouldn't
be transforming in a mere 12 hours.

They frantically tried to contact
those outside on the comms, but then
there was a loud noise. It was the
sound of the containment barriers
closing around the quarantine
facility. The researcher standing
right at the back of the group ran
to try to get out, but the walls
were already down.

The comms was silent.



        -------------------

While we despaired, the cocoons
started assaulting us with
tentacles. We managed to retreat all
the way to the containment wall
though pretty much everyone had
sustained serious injuries. We are
trapped here. There is no way out.

We heard a loud noise deep in the
facility. Was it another subject on
a rampage, striking the walls? I was
curious, but with the tentacles
trapping us here, there was no way I
would ever be able to make it there
to find out.

Some of the researchers have lost
their minds and are laughing, and
the others have barricaded
themselves in a corner. Me? I'm
writing this.

















        -------------------

Damn it, they're gassing us all
Hand  go ng numb
    t write
am I  in  die here
damn       to hel
%END



#####################################
%22,JP
作戦指示書
	written by イェルス軍少尉

　本作戦において、冒険者の諸君には私の部
隊と共に行動し、指示に従ってもらう必要が
ある。これより作戦行動時における注意事項
を伝える。
 　
　まず全体への指示は＜コマンドフラッグ＞
を使用して行う。個人の指示は＜戦闘指示＞
から行う。
 　
　次に各指示の内容を伝える。
 　
　まず＜突撃態勢＞。最大限に索敵を行いな
がら移動、敵を見つけ次第攻撃を開始する。
戦闘では、敵に対し積極的に攻撃と追跡を行
うこと。全火力を開放し、全ての敵を残らず
始末しろ。誰一人として逃してはならない。

　次に＜防御態勢＞。一切の攻撃行動を禁止
する。敵の行動に注視し、時には妨害・撹乱
を用いて戦線の維持に務めろ。敵に攻撃を受
けた際には、各自身を守りながら可能な限り
 その場に留まり、味方の支援と指示を待て。
 　
　続いて＜迎撃態勢＞。周囲に索敵を行いな
がら移動、敵を見つけ次第攻撃を開始する。
戦闘は、必ず指揮が届く範囲内で行うこと。
他の指示に備え、火力は温存して戦え。くれ
ぐれも敵を深追いしてはならない。

　最後は＜交渉態勢＞。敵を直接攻撃せずに
話術や歌で戦意を削ぐこと。敵の疲弊や撤退
を狙う。
　
　訓練を受けていない諸君に、これ以上の細
かな指示は行わない。作戦の内容については
現地で説明する。以上。
%END

%22,EN
Mission Briefing
	prepared by:
	Second Lieutenant Gornock, Yerles Army

In today's exercise, you adventurers
will be mobilized along with my
platoon. You will follow my orders.

See this? This is the command flag.
I will be using this to give
Directives to each and everyone of
you.

Directives are simple, and there
are only four of them.

First off is "Onslaught". It means
search and destroy. When I give
this order, everyone of you should
keep moving while searching for
enemies. Destroy every enemy that
you come across. Be on the offensive
and pursue your targets. Use
everything you got, and leave no
enemy standing.

Next is "Defense". Do not attack.
Under no circumstances will any of
you engage the enemy when this
Directive is given. Watch for enemy
movements, and sabotage or distract
the enemy when you can, but hold
your fire. If you are under fire,
hold your position the best you can,
and wait for further orders.

Third is "Intercept". Engage
only enemies that are close by. Any
skirmishes must be within range of
the commander. If I don't see the
enemy, neither do you. Is that clear?
Do not over-extend. Conserve your
resources and wait for new orders.
Do not pursue any enemy out of range.

Lastly, we have "Talking". Do not
attack any enemies, but speak
or sing to them to break their will.
Your aim will be to wear them down
and get them to retreat.

You have not been trained, so the
instructions you will receive are
simple and few. You will receive
further orders on the field. That is
all.
%END

#####################################
%23,JP
まだその段階か？
	written by 自称選ばれし者

　諸君の中にはアレが視える者が果たして
何名いるだろうか。人の足元に輝くオレンジ
色のオーラだ。私は「ゲージ」と呼んでいる
がな。

　私もかつては自分だけ視えることに苦悩
したものだよ。観察していれば気がつくはず
だが、アレは戦いの中で気力が高まるにつれ
臨界に近づいていく。裏を返せば、気をそぐ
ことで抑制することもできるというわけだ。

　臨界を迎えるとゲージは白色に輝く。
これは持てる技術の全てを注ぎ、身に着けて
いる物全ての性能をフルに発揮した一撃を繰
り出そうという、意思の表れ…すなわち強力
な追加攻撃の予兆である。

　勘違いしてはいけないのが、これは不完全
な段階に過ぎないということだ。臨界を超越
したゲージは、淡い緑色の光を放ち戦いの中
で刹那の時間領域を支配するのだから。

　いずれ諸君にもわかることだろう。
その段階に到達することができれば、だが。
私はこちら側で気長に待っているよ。
%END

%23,EN
Get on my level
	by The Chosen One(?)

Just how many - or how few - of you
can Perceive it? The Aura that glows
at people's feet. This Aura is what
I call...

The Gauge.

Being so Special in my Ability to
Perceive it has long tormented me.
But it is actually not very
difficult to Perceive, for all you
need to do is to... look. When
Emotions run high in combat, watch.
Watch as the Aura grows and reaches
its Peak. The converse is also true -
by reining in the Emotions, the
Gauge can be suppressed.

At its Peak, the Gauge will gleam
with a pearlescent radiance. By
pouring your very Soul into your
Techniques and focusing every Fibre
of your Being, you can Manifest your
Will into The One Strike That Will
Fell The Enemy.

...Which is to say that you can
pull off an extra-strong attack when
it's white.

But that is not all there is to it,
for the White Gauge is not the final
stage. Beyond it is the Pale Green
Gauge, which will allow the User to
have control over Time itself.



You will eventually understand what
I mean. That is, if you ever get on
my level. And I shall be there
waiting.
%END


#####################################
%24,JP
ネクロマニュアル
	written by 退屈ネクロマンサー

　最近は駒で遊ぶのも飽きてきた。
　このままネクロマンシーが過去の遺物となる
のも忍びないしせっかくだからこれを読んで
いる君に初歩的なネクロマンシーを伝授して
楽しもうと思う。

　まずは棺に適当な生物の残骸を入れる。
錬金術で残骸を仮培養し、魔力の結晶を核と
してボディを形成していこう。隠し味として
強い悪意を込めながら作るとグッド。
　有象無象の操り死体を量産する程度なら
この通り錬金術で充分代用できる。

　本格的一品は芸術的センスとネクロマンシー
の完全な知識、経験の積み重ね、「パーツ」
の厳選が必要になるから初心者には100年早い。
専用ナノマシンや粘菌も、今じゃかなり手に
入りにくいと思うな。

　作れるアンデッドの種類だけれど、質の良く
ない残骸からはあまり大きな物は作れない。
無理に形を作っても強度不足で簡単に自壊し
ちゃうからね。
　一度作ったアンデッドの棺に、さらに残骸を
合成することで後付強化もできる。強化に使う
残骸の種類によって効果が違うので色々と試し
てみよう。効果自体は後で残骸を付け替えるこ
とで変更できるし。

　自我を移植していないアンデッドは知能が
低くろくに思考もできない指示待ち脳なので、
どの人間を襲えばいいのかちゃんと指示して
あげよう。上手く使役して敵を倒せば、直接
君が手を下していなくても経験になるよ。

　使役アンデッドの真骨頂は物量。とにかく
事前に数を用意しておき、倒されても倒され
てもすぐに替わりを出し続けて絶望させよう。
　一応、術者の身を削って強化や回復も可能
だけれど、一騎当千の強さの相手には蹴散ら
されてしまうだろう。
　そんな時に役立つのが自爆特攻だ。片っ端
から組み付かせて爆発させてやろう。こちら
の消耗も激しいけれど、汚い花火を浴び続け
て次第に衰弱していく猛者を眺めているのは
なかなかに愉快なものだよ。

　…こんなところかな？さぁ、君も始めよう
ネクロマンシー！
%END

%24,EN
Necromanual
	written by
	a bored necromancer

Chess has gotten boring.

Necromancy is also quickly becoming
a forgotten art - and that will
not do - so perhaps I could teach
you, dear reader, a thing or two
about it.

To start, place a piece of a monster
into a coffin. Next, using a mana
crystal, shape the body into the
desired form with Alchemy. Finally,
garnish generously with malice.

That's all there is, really, if all
that you want is an army of mass-
produced undead. To make a true
work of art, however, will require
you to have a sophisticated taste,
complete knowledge of necromancy,
and years of experience. Choosing
the perfect monster part to use is
certainly not a task for beginners.
The special nanomachines and
bacteria you need are also rather
hard to come by these days.

Just keep in mind that you can't
make something big if you start
from a low quality piece monster
part. Stretching will only get you
that far before it starts to
collapse on itself.



Undead that you've made can be
remodeled by the further addition
of one monster part. How it's
remodeled depends on what kind of
part is added, so you may want to
experiment with that. Don't worry,
you can always remodel with a
different part if it's not to your
liking.

These undead don't have the
capacity to think, and will tend to
stand around until they receive
explicit instructions from you. Be
sure to tell them which humans they
should be attacking. If they do
defeat something, you can have good
experience and a good time without
even lifting a finger.

There is power in numbers. Create
enough of them and you can
immediately replace any that fall
in combat. Results in an
unrelenting horde that will
mercilessly crush your enemies.

You could heal them at the cost
of your own life, but that's
probably not a good idea when
you're up against something that
single-handedly can take on your
army of undead. In these cases,
you might want to blow up them up
instead. Watch adversaries get
tossed about like a rag doll,
explosion after explosion. Costly,
yes, but you cannot put a price
tag on fun.

That's about it. Now go try it
for yourself. Shoo.
%END


#####################################
%25,JP
ジャーナルのひみつ
	written by 真のジャーナリスト

　今や一家に一冊の必需品である自動日誌：
ジャーナル。君はその機能を使いこなせてい
るだろうか？

　ジャーナルは受けた依頼や仕事の内容を自
動で記録しておくだけでなく、ものによって
はその難易度まで推測してくれる。
　ここでいう○レベル相当というのは討伐対
象などのレベルのことであり、挑戦者に必要
なレベルはそこまで高くないことに注意だ。
　準備万端なら表記の６割くらいのレベルで
も充分達成できたりするしそもそもクエスト
によっては戦闘がないものもある。

　また、ジャーナルは所持者の過去の行動数
を一部自動でカウントしている。これは設定
からレコード表示の項目を変更することで確
認することができるぞ。

　他にも情報屋とのリンクで同業者のニュー
スも見れるし、現在の各種ノルマやランキン
グなども確認できる。

　何をするべきだったかわからなくなった時
や振り返りたくなった時は見返してみよう。

%END

%25,EN
The secrets of the journal
	by a PRO journalist

I see you've gotten your hands on
the latest fad that everybody's
gotta have - the Autoscribing
Journal. But have you been putting
it to good use?

The journal doesn't just list the
quests undertaken by you - it also
has the difficulty of each one of
them.

The level (Lv) indicated is that
of the target monster's, buuuut
you probably don't have to be
of that level to defeat it. If
you're armed to the teeth, you
could manage with, eh, maybe 60%
of the monster's level? Not all
quests involve combat, so there's
that too.

The journal also automagically
keeps track of the number of times
the holder has done something.
Turn on Record in the Settings,
and you'll be good to go.

It's also got an uplink to town
informers, so you can also check
up on what your colleagues are
doing while on the go. Oh, and
it also has your guild quotas and
rankings.




So yeah, have a look at it when you
forget where you're supposed to go
or if you wanna see how you've been
doing.
%END

#####################################
%26,JP
魔術講義配布資料
	written by エウダーナ中央学院初等部

・マナ
　世界に遍在する原始的な力の源。海中や大
気中、地中にすら存在する。あらゆる生物は
このマナを蓄えており、捕食等によってマナ
も移動していく。これをマナの連鎖という。
ただし、生物ごとにマナの許容限界があり、
溢れたマナは体外に放出される。
　また、完全に死ぬとマナを繋ぎ留められな
くなり、少しずつ死体からマナが抜けて世界
に還っていく。
　魔力に変換することが主なため、魔法使い
の間ではマナ≒魔力のニュアンスで使われる
ことも多い。

・魔力
　魔術を行使するためにマナを適した形へ変
換したエネルギーのこと。マナそのままの形
では魔術効率が悪く、原始的なことにしか使
えない。
　魔術の素養のことも魔力と呼称するが、こ
ちらの用法はここ１００年ほどで広まった比
較的新しいものである。

・ＭＰ
　マジックポイント。魔力（エネルギーの方）
の量を現す数値。

・神力
　神がその能力を行使するために必要とする
エネルギー。供物から抽出した信仰心をマナ
と化合させたものとされている。魔力とは似
て非なるものであり、わが国でも再現できた
魔法使いはいない。

マナを水に例えると、魔力は飲料水（水圧）
、ＭＰは水量、神力はラムネのようなものだ
と覚えること。
%END

%26,EN
SOR110 Introduction to Sorcery
	Lecture 1 notes
	Eulderna Metropolitan University

Mana
=====
A primordial source of power
omnipresent in the world, found in
the ocean, in the atmosphere, and
within the earth. Living organisms
sequester mana, and it may also get
passed between organisms through
predation and other means. This is
known as the mana cycle. Mana
sequestered within an organism may
not exceed its capacity for it;
any excess is excreted to the
environment.


Dead organisms do not retain mana.
Upon death, mana previously
contained within the organism will
begin diffusing out and back into
the environment.

As the main use of mana is to
convert it to MP, many sorcerers
use the terms MP and mana
interchangeably.

Magic
======
A form of energy that mana is
converted into that is required
for performing sorcery. Without
conversion, mana cannot be
efficiently used for spells and
can only be used for the most
rudimentary of purposes.

The affinity of an entity for
magic is also happens to be called
Magic (sometimes also known as the
Magic attribute) but this
terminology is fairly new and came
into popular use only about 100
years ago.

MP
===
Magic points. Unit of measurement
for amount of Magic energy.

Divine power
=============
Energy that gods require to use
their powers. The current theory
is that it is extracted from
offerings of their faithful and
combined with mana. It is similar
in some ways to magic, but is
otherwise a completely different
form of energy. Sorcerers in our
country have yet to discover how
to harness this power.

As an analogy, if mana were water,
then MP would be bottles of water,
and divine power would be bottles
of soda.
%END

#####################################
%27,JP
採掘はいいぞ
	written by ミスター削岩機

　オレはホルゾイ！自分で言うのもなんだが
採掘を極めたタフなナイスガイだぜ。

　採掘はいいぞ。耐久力を鍛えるついでに、
アイテムも見つかるんだからな。立ち塞がる
壁を掘り進め！自分の道は自分で切り開け！



　そうだ。採掘で壁から出てくるアイテムは
場所によって違うことを知っているか？


　洞窟・湖ネフィアは鉱石類が埋まっている。
大地の神や癒しの女神への捧げ物を確保する
なら是非行こうぜ！原石は合成の壺で加工し
て高値で売るのもいいらしいな！
　森ネフィアの壁は珍しい食べ物の宝庫だ！
軽くて腐らないどんぐり、なかなか高価な黄
金どんぐり…きっとリスなんかが埋めていた
んだろうな。ラッキーな四つ葉のクローバー
も見つかるかもしれないぞ。

　塔・砦ネフィアからは構成物である石材を
切り出せるぞ。合成して彫刻にできるらしい
けれどオレは芸術がよくわからねぇ！他には
昔の人が壁に隠していた金庫も出てきたりす
るぜ。

　巣穴の壁にはそこに暮らす生き物の痕跡や
卵が埋まっているんだ。フンを掘り当てても
泣くんじゃないぞ。

　霊園は壁自体が墓石だ！掘ればお供え物や
棺桶が出てくるぞ。バチあたり？なんだそれ。
食えるのか？

　鉱山は掘れば鉱物が採れる。通常の鉱石は
鉱脈が違うのか、過去に採り尽されたのかは
知らんが全く出てこない！いい粘土が採れる
から陶芸家の先生には喜ばれるけどな！

　あとは…街の壁を掘ると、住人のへそくり
の金貨や金塊が出てくるぞ。タンスに隠して
おくとタンスごと盗まれるからな。今じゃ、
タンス預金より壁預金が流行っているんだ。


　さぁキミも、掘って掘って掘りまくろう。
オレのように採掘でタフに！なろうぜっ！！
%END

%27,EN
You dig mining?
	by Borzoi J. Hammer

Borzoi here. And when it comes to
mining, I'm the BEST.

You dig mining? 'cuz I sure do.
It trains constitution. You come
across stuff. And best of all, if
you got no path, you can just
MAKE ONE.

And didja know that mining in
different places will get you
different stuff? Betcha didn't.

These Cave and Lake nefia are
filled with ores, so you'll want
to go to these places if you want
to give stuff to the Gods of the
Earth or Healin'. Or if that's not
your thing, you could give 'em a
little polish by tossing them in
a fusion pot and they'll fetch some
good coin.

Forest nefia are full of food that
you won't find anywhere else.
Acorns never rot so you can keep
some in your pockets at all times.
Then there's valuable golden acorns
too. Gold! Must've been hidden
there by a squirrel or summat. You
might even luck out and find a rare
four leafed clover.

Fortress and Tower nefia are made
of stone, so guess what you get
when you mine there? Stone! Heard
you can sculpt these with uh...
"item fusion", but I don't
understand these artsy kinda
things. You'll also find safes
that people hid in there a long
time ago.

Nest nefia will have the remains
and eggs of whatever lived in
there. And a whole load of shit,
which you're gonna have to wade
through to find anything good.

People bury their dead in the
walls of Cemeteries. Prolly just
out of habit for those people
used to stashing their stuff in
walls. Dig around for offerings and
coffins. Are you gonna get cursed
for doing that, you ask? Pssh
'course not. Waste not, want not.

Mines yield ores. But not regular
ores. Probably ran out of those.
Wouldn't have become a nefia if
they didn't, eh? There's lotsa
clay here for pottery and stuff.

Lesee... oh right. Towns. Mine
there and you might come across
the coins and gold bars that the
folk have stashed away. After all,
you can't store money in shelves,
'cuz those would get stolen,
shelves and everything. So walls
are where them people hide them
life savings.

So what are you waiting for?
Start mining!
%END

#####################################
%28,JP
ワッツエンターテインメント？
	written by 無名の旅芸人


　芸人募集依頼の達成方法を個人的に色々試
した結果を、忘れないようまとめておく。
　一度だけでなく、相手がちゃんと満足する
か飽きるまで何度でも披露するのがコツ…と
誰かが言ってたっけ。でも速さが足りない！



○演奏：選んだ楽器を演奏する。会場にも楽
器があるけれど備え付けで範囲上不便なので
持ち込んだほうがいい。どの楽器を使うかで
客の満足具合も変わってくる。
おひねりは金・アイテム両方と恵まれてる。
さらに、幻の楽器ストラディバリウスはおひ
ねりの質を上げるらしい…。

○アンサンブル：仲間と合唱するので仲間の
経験にもなるみたい。楽器はいらない。
仲間の協力で普通の演奏より成功しやすいし
スキルが一定以上ならおひねりの質が上昇。
でも時間はかかるしスタミナを多く使うので
普通の演奏と比べてムダが出やすく、よほど
速く動けないと得点が稼げない。

○説法：神のすばらしさを、熱意を込めつつ
言葉巧みに演説。仲間の経験にもなるみたい
。満足させれば、お布施としてお金が結構貰
えるけれど、アイテムは貰えない。
異教徒も改宗するくらいうまく喋ると、より
満足してもらえるみたいだ。

○魅了の舞：演奏より短い時間でより簡単に
満足してもらえるので得点稼ぎ向き。
魅力さえあればいいから成功もしやすい。
問題は、みんな見惚れちゃっておひねりがほ
とんど貰えないってこと。

○火炎芸：炎上した。ヤケドしながら頑張っ
て覚えたのに、誰も褒めてくれなかった…。

　一流の芸人になって皆に笑顔と満足を届け
られるようになりたいけど、失敗して石を投
げられるのがいい加減ツラくなってきた。
　母さんも、実家に帰ってこいって最近しつ
こい…。

（メモはここで終わっている）
%END

%28,EN
What's in a performance?
	by a nameless travelling performer

I'm going to jot down a couple of
ways of completing Performing
quests in here just so that I don't
forget. I've heard people say that
all you need to do is to keep
performing to a person until he's
satisfied or bored, but I'm just
not Speedy enough for that. So.

PERFORMING: perform with an
instrument of your choice. You
might find one at the event grounds,
but it might not be in the right
place so it's best to bring one
yourself. What instrument you use
may determine whether patrons are
satisfied with your Performance or
not. If they are, they will
shower you with gold and items.
I've also heard fables of the
legendary Stradivarius improving
the quality of items thrown at
you...

ENSEMBLE: sing with your pets.
It'll be good experience for them,
and you don't need an instrument
either. It's a group effort so it's
easier to succeed than a regular
solo Performance, and if you're
skilled enough the items thrown
will be of better quality too. But
doing this takes quite a bit of
time and stamina, so be sure not
to waste an ensemble on a deserted
area. It also means you won't score
as many Points with the client if
you're not quick enough.

PREACHING: spread the Word about
your God and captivate people with
a gilded tongue. Pets seem to gain
experience from this. If people are
satisfied with your preaching,
they'll give you quite a fair amount
of alms. Meaning gold. No items
though. If you're so convincing
that people convert to your faith,
then those people are going to be
even more satisfied.

FASCINATION DANCE: this one's
quicker than Performing and
satisfies people more easily, so
it's great for scoring Points with
the client. If you're Charismatic,
then all the better. There's just
a bit of a problem with this -
people become too transfixed on
your gyrating hips to give you
any money.

FIRE BREATHING: did the best I
could while on fire, but nobody
even bat an eye...

It's my dream to become a great
performer and bring smiles to
people's faces wherever I go, but
so far it's only been bringing
rocks. Thrown in my direction. And
Mum's been telling me to come
home...

(The document ends here.)
%END

#####################################
%29,JP
次元間力観測実験報告書
	written by 開発主任『ガベラ』


　次元間力とは、次元を超えて人や物に相互
作用する力である。その存在は古来から考察
されていたが、具体的な観測に成功した例が
なく、長らく架空のものとして扱われていた。

　「次元を隔てる壁が次元間力を大きく阻害
するため機器での観測が極めて困難」という
ベルデヘルマン仮説を確かめるため、今回、
次元歪曲ユニットを用いて次元境界面を取り
除いたうえでベルデヘルマンの第１実験及び
第２実験を行った。
なお今回使用した機器は別紙第１表のとおり
である。





　別紙図１から図６に示した結果から、普段
は次元間力のおよそ０．００２５％しか作用
していないという事実が判明した。
特に第２実験においては次元歪曲率との間で
顕著な反比例が見られた。これはアリアンの
エネルギー法則とも合致する結果である。
同一存在は次元を超えて確かに繋がっている
と言っても過言ではないだろう。
　ただし対象物ＡとＢを同一次元内に移した
ところ、次元間力はすみやかに消失した。
この現象についてはより詳細な実験が必要と
思われる。

　エネルギー利用の可能性についても述べる。
次元間においても、エネルギーは高い所から
低い所へ流れることがわかったため、うまく
次元を連結させればほぼ無尽蔵のエネルギー
を獲得できると考えられる。
　しかし、次元間力にはまだ不明な点も多く
一方的なエネルギーの搾取が長期的に両次元
へどのような影響を及ぼすか現段階では予測
がつかない。仮に一切影響が生じなかったと
しても相手方に侵略行為と捉えられる可能性
がある。

　まずは広大な多次元宇宙において同一存在
がどのように繋がりを確保しているのか、
そのメカニズムを研究し、先に次元間通信を
実用化することを進言する。


%END

%29,EN
Experimental Characterization of
	Dimensional Energy
	by Gavela et al.


Dimensional energy is a form of
energy capable of trans-dimensional
interaction with objects, including
people. Its existence has long
been theorized but has lacked
definitive experimental evidence.

Here we present its
characterization via Verde-Hermann
experiments with a novel
dimensional warp unit. We also
explore the potential
ramifications and applications of
this technology.


To test Verde-Hermann's postulate
that measurement of dimensional
energy is difficult due to the
dampening of dimensional energy by
the inter-dimensional barrier, we
perturbed the barrier with a
dimensional warp unit and
conducted the first and second
Verde-Hermann tests. The
observational unit used is
outlined in Appendix 1.

From the data (Appendices 1 to 6),
we have determined that
dimensional energy is weakened
by a factor of approximately
0.0025% under normal circumstances.


In the second test, we determined
at a high confidence level that it
is likely that dimensional
energy strength is inversely
proportional to dimensional
warpage, conforming to Ariane's
Laws of Energy. However, we also
find that when two analogous
objects A and B are moved such that
they are in the same dimension,
rapid dissipation of dimensional
energy occurs. Further experiments
are needed to elucidate the
mechanism for this phenomenon.

As dimensional energy flows down
the potential gradient, we find
find that there is the possibility
that limitless energy can be
harnessed if dimensions can be linked.

However, we urge caution in the
long-term harnessing of dimensional
energy as the effects on the
affected dimensions are yet
unknown. Furthermore, even if the
harnessing power causes no direct
effects, it may be deemed an act
of aggression by inhabitants in
the other dimension.

To conclude, further research is
needed for determining how
analogous existences are linked in
multi-dimensional space, and to
study the mechanism for that
linkage to develop a practical
trans-dimensional communications
tool.
%END

#####################################
%30,JP
依頼についてのアドバイス
	written by 心配性の父

愛するわが子へ。
　お前が家出の準備を進めていることは知っ
ていました。荷物の底に父さんのなけなしの
お小遣いをこっそり入れておきます。それが
尽きる前に、街で依頼を受けて自分で生活費
を稼ぎなさい。
　依頼には色々な種類があります。




○物を手に入れてくる依頼
先に物を確保してから依頼を受けるのがコツ
です。
だいたい野外に落ちていたり、お店で売って
います。野外に行くなら野生動物と無理に戦
わないこと。
○人から物を手に入れてくる依頼
ガードさんに持ち主の居場所を尋ね、会って
自分の手持ちアイテムと交換できないか話し
てみましょう。
その人以外から手に入れても大丈夫なので、
先に野外で拾ったりお店で買っておくと安心。

○料理を用意する依頼
生活に苦労している段階で、食材を確保して
目当ての料理を作るのは困難です。
料理を確保できてから依頼を受けること。
運がよければお店で売っていることもあるで
しょう。

○作物を収穫する依頼
野生動物がうじゃうじゃいるので、あしらえ
るようになってから挑んでください。
作物を引き抜く際にちょっと身体も鍛えられ
ます。
ノルマの数倍のスコアを出せば報酬が増えた
りブロンズ硬貨ももらえたりしますが、最初
は難しいでしょうね。
納入箱の位置が分からなくなったら、慌てず
に*キーで探すこと。

○モンスター退治の依頼
他の依頼でお金を貯めて、全身にましな防具
を装備してから挑みましょう。
ペットを連れていくのならペットにも防具を
渡してあげてください。iキーです。
さもなければ返り討ちにされます。難易度が
一番低いやつでも、です。

○物を配達する依頼
別の街に行かなくてはならないので、食糧や
戦力が安定して、街の位置関係も把握できて
からにしましょう。
届ける相手は届け先の街のガードさんが教え
てくれます。もし期間内に届けられなかった
場合、横領の罪になってしまいます。
○人を護衛する依頼
こちらも別の街に行くことになります。護衛
対象が死ぬと失敗。稼ぎやすいので近場かつ
安全な種類ならば、悪くない賭けです。

○穴や地雷を撤去する依頼
罠の知識のスキルがないと体力が持ちません。
他には、物質を感知できる魔法やアイテムが
鍵を握っています。

○芸を披露する依頼
演奏や説法、舞などの芸ができないと厳しい
です。レベルの高い人に下手な芸を見せると
殺されるので、芸ができても最初は乞食や老
人が集まっているところでやりましょう。

　父さんが知っているのはここまでです。
ヴェルニースの南にある施設では色々な講座
をやっているらしいので、依頼でお金を稼い
だら早めに行ってみてはどうでしょうか。

　しかしプチを飼うのに反対されたからって
母さんとあんな大喧嘩しなくてもよかったで
しょう。
　もし生活が思うようにいかなかったら意地
を張らずに戻ってくること。お前のことだか
ら、ヤケを起こして乞食になったりしそうで、
父さんは心配です。世の中には、弱者を食い
物にする輩が大勢いるので気をつけて。
　父さんは…もちろん母さんだって、お前の
幸せを願っています。

%END

%30,EN
Quest Advice
	by Worried dad

Son,
    I know you've been planning to
leave. I've managed to scrounge up
some money - you can find it at the
bottom of your belongings. It
should tide you over until you can
establish an income from taking
quests in towns.

    You should know that there are
several types of quests though:

- Item requests
    The key to these is to have the
item before taking on the quest.
They often ask for stuff that can be
found lying around in the
wilderness or in shops.
When going out to the wilderness,
you don't have to fight every wild
animal you come across.

- Belongings requests
    Ask a guard where you can find
the person who has the requested
item. Then talk to that guy, and
exchange some of your items for it.
Or, you can get it from just about
anywhere - from the wilderness or
shops - the quest giver won't know
the difference.

- Cooked dish requests
    It's going to be hard to have
ingredients to cook the dishes they
want when you don't even have
enough to eat yourself. Take on
these quests when you're not
struggling. If you're lucky, you
might find the ingredient you need
in a shop in town.

- Harvesting requests
    These are filled with wild
animals, so you'll need to be able
to fend them off at the very least.
These are decent for training
because you'll be pulling up lots
of crops from the ground.
Exceed quota by several times and
they'll pay you more. They might
even give you a bronze coin too.
But going over is going to be hard
when you're just starting off.
If you forget where the delivery
chest is, don't panic - just look
around with the * key.
- Monster slaying requests
    Before taking these on, make
sure you are fully equipped with
decent armour. If you have a pet,
make sure they are equipped as well
by handing them equipment while
'i'nteracting with them (using the
'i' key). If you don't, these WILL
kill you. Yes, even the easiest ones.

- Item delivery requests
    You'll need to go to another
town to complete these. Have enough
food and be combat ready. Know
where you are and where you're going.
In the destination town, you can
ask guards where the delivery
recipient is. If you don't deliver
in time, they'll accuse you of
pocketing the item.
- Escort requests
    This one will also need you to
go to another town. If the escorted
target dies, the quest is failed.
These can be profitable if it's
only a short jog to the destination
and the client isn't in any sort of
danger.

- Hole and mine removal requests
    You won't last without the
Disarm Trap skill. Either that or
spells or items that allow you to
Sense or Detect Objects.

- Performing requests
    These are hard if you can't
perform, preach, or dance. If a
high level person sees you messing
up, he might kill you. So even if
you can perform, be sure to perform
only to beggars and old people
until you get proficient at it.




    That's about all that I know.
There's a cram school south of Vernis
where you can attend some seminars
to learn more, so you might want
to go there when you have some
money to spare after finishing some
quests.

    It really didn't have to come
to this - the quarrel with Mom
about getting a pet putit and
everything.

    If you don't manage, please
don't be stubborn - come home.
Given how headstrong you are,
you'd probably rather resort to
begging on the streets, but know
that I'm worried about you. Do be
careful out there, and watch your
back. There are plenty of people
out there who thrive on preying on
others.

    And also know that whatever
you are, I - and your mother
as well - hope that you are
happy.

Love,
your dad
%END

#####################################
%31,JP
釣り入門
	written by 釣り自慢のフィッシャー

　釣りは時間調整のついでに魚が手に入る！
魚は食べても売ってもオイシイ！どうだい、
釣りを始めたくなってきただろう？
　まず必要なのは釣りスキルだ。持っていな
ければヴェルニースのトレイナーに教えても
らうんだな。

　スキルを用意したら、釣りに必要な釣竿と
釣り餌を買ってくるんだ。餌は最初のうちは
ミジンコが最適だろう。B(shift+b)で、餌を
釣り竿に装着するんだ。餌1個で15〜24回分
くらいだ。

　高い餌を使っても、スキルが低いと上手く
釣れないからな。目安としては、釣りスキル
が10上がるたびにひとつ上の餌に変えていく
くらいでいいんじゃないかな。ガラクタしか
釣れない場合は、餌に対してスキルが足りて
いないってことだ。ガラクタは使い道が特に
ないぞ。

　同じ魚でも、大きさが違えば重さや価値が
違ってくる。なるべく大物を釣り上げたいが、
こればっかりは運だな。そのままだと８時間
くらいで腐ってしまうから、こまめに料理す
るかクーラーボックス等に保管しよう。どう
しても持ちきれない場合は、水中に置いてお
けば腐らないぞ。

　さて…釣った魚には実は餌をやることがで
きる。俺は合成の壺で撒き餌を作って与えて
いるよ。餌をやると魚の質が良くなるし、稀
にだが、アイテムを吐き出したりするんだ。
釣った魚に餌をやらないタイプは、このこと
を知らないんだろうなぁ。

%END

%31,EN
Fishing Introduction
	by A proud fisherman

Kill time, get fish!
Two birds, one stone!
Do I have you hooked?
If so, read on!

First you'll need the Fishing
skill. Don't have it? Learn it
from the trainer in Vernis!

Next, you'll need to buy some
fishing rod and bait. Water flea
is best for beginners. 'B'lend
(Shift + b key) one to attach it to
your rod. One water flea is good
for 15-24 uses.


The pricier and better baits won't
work if your Fishing skill isn't up
to snuff. Generally, you can switch
to a better bait every 10 skill
levels. If all you're reeling in is
junk, that means you don't have
enough skill to use that bait yet.
And junk is... junk! There's no use
for it.

As for the fish - the amount
they'll fetch when sold depends on
their size and weight. There's no
choosing the size of fish that bite
though. It's all up to Lady Ehekatl!

Fish will also go bad in about
8 hours, so you'll want to cook
them and cook often. Or you can
carry them around in a cooler box.
If you've got more fish than you
can carry (wow!), pop them in a
puddle on the ground. They won't go
bad that way, ever!

Speaking of those fish in a puddle...
you can do some tricks with them.
I like to give mine ground bait,
crafted in a fusion pot. Fish will
grow in quality when you do, and
they might even spit out a useful
item or two for you! If you're the
sort who never feeds their fishies,
you're missing out!
%END


#####################################
%32,JP
収容者矯正の手引
	written by センパイ管理官

　収容所の管理官デビューおめでとう！
これからは、めぼしい子は檻にしまって収容所
までどんどん運んじゃおうね！
　収容所で素直になった子は、どんなにあなた
を嫌っていても従うしかなくなっちゃう。
愛玩用のコレクションにしてもいいし、仲間に
だってなってくれるよ。

　え？仲間にするだけなら手間をかけずに
奴隷を買ってくる？支配の魔法があるから
いらない？
　分かってないなー。最初から従順な子や
魔法で従順にした子を使うのとは違うよー。
嫌がっている子を仕方なく労働させることで
しか得られないエナジーがあるの！

　よーし、まずはボードを使ってみようか？

　捕まえてきた子を檻から出したら、労働強度を
設定して労働させよう！どうせ誰も逃げられない
から、3日くらい放置してから様子を見に来て。
　設定労働強度が高いほど、労働エナジーが多く
溜まるよ。でも高いほど生命力を消費しちゃう
から、死人が出たら新しい子を補充するのを
忘れちゃだめだよ？
　収容所内の物は特に獲得エナジーには影響
しないから、レイアウトはお好みでオッケー。
　あとは…素直ないい子ほど熱心に労働して
労働エナジーを多く生んでくれるよ。
　素直な子へ矯正するのはとってもカンタン！
見せしめに何人か処刑するだけ！処刑用の子も
含めて、とにかく頭数を揃えると楽になるかな。

　どう、やれそう？じゃあ、悪い子をみーんな
矯正していこっか？


%END

%32,EN
Inmate Correction Manual
Written by Manager Senpai

Congratulations on your debut 
as an inmate supervisor! 
From now on, you'll be able to 
keep the most promising children 
in cages and take them to 
the camps!

Once they've become obedient 
in the camps, they'll have no 
choice but to obey you, no 
matter how much they dislike 
you. They can become your 
loyal pets! Or friends, even!

Huh? Just buy a slave to skip 
the hassle if you just want 
a friend? You don't want a gulag 
because you have the magic of 
domination?

Alright, let's use the board 
first, shall we?

After you let the captured 
kids out of their cages, set 
the labour intensity and make 
them work! No one can escape 
anyway, so leave them for about 
three days and then come back 
to check on them.

The higher the labour intensity 
you set, the more labour energy 
you'll accumulate. But the higher 
the intensity, the more life force 
you consume, so don't forget to 
replenish the with new ones when 
people die, okay?

The things in the camps don't 
particularly affect the Energy 
you gain, so you can arrange the 
layout however you like.

Also... the more obedient and 
good children are, it's more 
likely they will work hard and 
produce more Labour Energy.

It's very easy to correct them 
to be honest and upstanding! 
Just make them as an example by
Executing them! It will be easier 
if we have less of them anyways, 
including the ones for the executions.

How do you think you can do it? 
Well, let's correct all the damn 
kids, shall we?


%END
#####################################